ONE

I was lost, it was already dusk, I had been driving for hours and was
practically out of petrol. The idea of being stranded on these lonely hills in
the dark appalled me, so I was glad to see a signpost, and coast down to a
garage. When I opened a window to speak to the attendant, the air outside was
so cold that I turned up my collar. While he was filling the tank he commented
on the weather. 'Never known such cold in this month. Forecast says we're in
for a real bad freeze-up.' Most of my life was spent abroad, soldiering, or
exploring remote areas: but though I had just come from the tropics and freeze-
ups meant little to me, I was struck by the ominous sound of his words. Anxious
to get on, I asked the way to the village I was making for. 'You'll never find
it in the dark, it's right off the beaten track. And those hill roads are
dangerous when they're iced-up.' He seemed to imply that only a fool would
drive on under present conditions, which rather annoyed me. So, cutting short
his involved directions, I paid him and drove away, ignoring his last warning
shout: 'Look out for that ice!'
It had got quite dark by now, and I was soon more hopelessly lost than ever. I
knew I should have listened to the fellow, but at the same time wished I had
not spoken to him at all. For some unknown reason, his remarks had made me
uneasy; they seemed a bad omen for the whole expedition, and I began to regret
having embarked on it.
I had been doubtful about the trip all along. I had arrived only the previous
day, and should have been attending to things in town instead of visiting
friends in the country. I myself did not understand my compulsion to see this
girl, who had been in my thoughts all the time I was away, although she was not
the reason for my return. I had come back to investigate rumours of a
mysterious impending emergency in this part of the world. But as soon as I got
here she became an obsession, I could think only of her, felt I must see her
immediately, nothing else mattered. Of course I knew it was utterly irrational.
And so was my present uneasiness: no harm was likely to come to me in my own
country; and yet I was becoming more and more anxious as I drove on.
Reality had always been something of an unknown quantity to me. At times this
could be disturbing. Now, for instance. I had visited the girl and her husband
before, and kept a vivid recollection of the peaceful, prosperous-looking
countryside round their home. But this memory was rapidly fading, losing its
reality, becoming increasingly unconvincing and indistinct, as I passed no one
on the road, never came to a village, saw no lights anywhere. The sky was
black, blacker untended hedges towering against it; and when the headlights
occasionally showed roadside buildings, these too were always black, apparently
uninhabited and more or less in ruins. It was just as if the entire district
had been laid waste during my absence.
I began to wonder if I would ever find her in the general disorder. It did not
look as if any organized life could have been going on here since whatever
disaster had obliterated the villages and wrecked the farms. As far as I could
see, no attempt had been made to restore normality. No rebuilding or work on
the land had been done, no animals were in the fields.
The road badly needed repairs, the ditches were choked with weeds under the
neglected hedges, the whole region appeared to have been left derelict and
deserted.
A handful of small white stones hit the windscreen, making me jump. It was so
long since I had experienced winter in the north that I failed to recognize the
phenomenon. The hail soon turned to snow, diminishing visibility and making
driving more difficult. It was bitterly cold, and I became aware of a connexion
between this fact and my increasing uneasiness. The garage man had said he had
never known it so cold at this time, and my own impression was that it was far
too early in the season for ice and snow. Suddenly my anxiety was so acute that
I wanted to turn and drive back to town; but the road was too narrow, I was
forced to follow its interminable windings up and down hill in the lifeless
dark. The surface got worse, it got steeper and more slippery all the time. The
unaccustomed cold made my head ache as I stared out, straining my eyes in the
effort of trying to avoid icy patches, where the car skidded out of control.
When the headlights fled over roadside ruins from time to time, the brief
glimpse always surprised me, and vanished before I was sure I had really seen
it.
An unearthly whiteness began to bloom on the hedges. I passed a gap and glanced
through. For a moment, my lights picked out like searchlights the girl's naked
body, slight as a child's, ivory white against the dead white of the snow, her
hair bright as spun glass. She did not look in my direction. Motionless, she
kept her eyes fixed on the walls moving slowly towards her, a glassy,
glittering circle of solid ice, of which she was the centre. Dazzling flashes
came from the ice-cliffs far over her head; below, the outermost fringes of ice
had already reached her, immobilized her, set hard as concrete over her feet
and ankles. I watched the ice climb higher, covering knees and thighs, saw her
mouth open, a black hole in the white face, heard her thin, agonized scream. I
felt no pity for her. On the contrary, I derived an indescribable pleasure from
seeing her suffer. I disapproved of my own callousness, but there it was.
Various factors had combined to produce it, though they were not extenuating
circumstances.
I had been infatuated with her at one time, had intended to marry her.
Ironically, my aim then had been to shield her from the callousness of the
world, which her timidity and fragility seemed to invite. She was over-
sensitive, highly- strung, afraid of people and life; her personality had been
damaged by a sadistic mother who kept her in a permanent state of frightened
subjection. The first thing I had to do was to win her trust, so I was always
gentle with her, careful to restrain my feelings. She was so thin that, when we
danced, I was afraid of hurting her if I held her tightly. Her prominent bones
seemed brittle, the protruding wrist-bones had a particular fascination for me.
Her hair was astonishing, silver-white, an albino's, sparkling like moonlight,
like moonlit Venetian glass. I treated her like a glass girl; at times she
hardly seemed real. By degrees she lost her fear of me, showed a childish
affection, but remained shy and elusive. I thought I had proved to her that I
could be trusted, and was content to wait. She seemed on the point of accepting
me, though immaturity made it hard to assess the sincerity of her feelings. Her
affection perhaps was not altogether pretence, although she deserted me
suddenly for the man to whom she was now married.
This was past history. But the consequences of the traumatic experience were
still evident in the insomnia and headaches from which I suffered. The drugs
prescribed for me produced horrible dreams, in which she always appeared as a
helpless victim, her fragile body broken and bruised. These dreams were not
confined to sleep only, and a deplorable side effect was the way I had come to
enjoy them.
Visibility had improved, the night was no less dark, but the snow had stopped.
I could see the remains of a fort on the top of a steep hill. Nothing much was
left of it but the tower, it had been gutted, empty window-holes showed like
black open mouths. The place seemed vaguely familiar, a distortion of something
I half-remembered. I seemed to recognize it, thought I had seen it before, but
could not be certain, as I had only been here in the summer, when everything
looked quite different.
At that time, when I accepted the man's invitation, I suspected him of an
ulterior motive in asking me. He was a painter, not serious, a dilettante; one
of those people who always have plenty of money without appearing to do any
work. Possibly he had a private income: but I suspected him of being something
other than what he seemed. The warmth of my reception surprised me, he could
not have been more friendly. All the same, I was on my guard.
The girl hardly spoke, stood beside him, glancing sideways at me with big eyes
through her long lashes. Her presence affected me strongly, though I scarcely
knew in what way. I found it difficult to talk to the two of them. The house
was in the middle of a beech wood, so closely surrounded by many tall trees
that we seemed to be actually in the tree tops, waves of dense green foliage
breaking outside every window. I thought of an almost extinct race of large
singing lemurs known as the Indris, living in the forest trees of a remote
tropical island. The gentle affectionate ways and strange melodious voices of
these near-legendary creatures had made a great impression on me, and I began
speaking about them, forgetting myself in the fascination of the subject. He
appeared interested. She said nothing, and presently left us to see about
lunch. The conversation at once became easier when she had gone.
It was midsummer, the weather was very hot, the rustling leaves just outside
made a pleasant cool sound. The man's friendliness continued. I seemed to have
misjudged him, and began to be embarrassed by my suspicions. He told me he was
glad I had come, and went on to speak of the girl. 'She's terribly shy and
nervous, it does her good to see someone from the outside world. She's too much
alone here.' I couldn't help wondering how much he knew about me, what she had
told him. To remain on the defensive seemed rather absurd; still, there was
some reservation in my response to his amiable talk.
I stayed with them for a few days. She kept out of my way. I never saw her
unless he was there too. The fine hot weather went on. She wore short, thin,
very simple dresses that left her shoulders and arms bare, no stockings, a
child's sandals. In the sunshine her hair dazzled. I knew I would not be able
to forget how she looked. I noted a marked change in her, a much increased
confidence. She smiled more often, and once in the garden I heard her singing.
When the man called her name she came running. It was the first time I had seen
her happy. Only when she spoke to me she still showed some constraint. Towards
the end of my visit he asked whether I had talked to her alone. I told him I
had not. He said: 'Do have a word with her before you go. She worries about the
past; she's afraid she made you unhappy.' So he knew. She must have told him
all there was to tell. It was not much, certainly. But I would not discuss what
had happened with him and said something evasive. Tactfully, he changed the
subject: but returned to it later on. 'I wish you would set her mind at rest. I
shall make an opportunity for you to speak to her privately.' I did not see how
he was going to do this, as the next day was the last I would spend with them.
I was leaving in the late afternoon.
That morning was the hottest there had been. Thunder was in the air. Even at
breakfast time the heat was oppressive. To my surprise, they proposed an
outing. I was not to leave without having seen one of the local beauty spots. A
hill was mentioned, from which there was a celebrated view: I had heard the
name. When I referred to my departure I was told it was only a short drive, and
that we should be back in plenty of time for me to pack my bag. I saw that they
were determined on the arrangement, and agreed.
We took a picnic lunch to eat near the ruins of an old fort, dating from a
remote period when there had been fear of invasion. The road ended deep in the
woods. We left the car and continued on foot. In the steadily increasing heat,
I refused to hurry, dropped behind, and when I saw the end of the trees, sat
down in the shade. He came back, pulled me to my feet. 'Come along! You'll see
that it's worth the climb.' His enthusiasm urged me up a steep sunny slope to
the summit, where I duly admired the view. Still unsatisfied, he insisted that
I must see it from the top of the ruin. He seemed in a queer state, excitable,
almost feverish. In the dusty dark, I followed him up steps cut inside the
tower wall, his massive figure blocking out the light so that I could see
nothing and might have broken my neck where a step was missing. There was no
parapet at the top, we stood among heaps of rubble, nothing between us and the
drop to the ground, while he swung his arm, pointing out different items in the
extensive view. 'This tower has been a landmark for centuries. You can see the
whole range of hills from here. The sea's over there. That's the cathedral
spire. The blue line beyond is the estuary.'
I was more interested in closer details: piles of stones, coils of wire,
concrete blocks, and other materials for dealing with the coming emergency.
Hoping to see something that would provide a clue to the nature of the expected
crisis, I went nearer the edge, looked down at the unprotected drop at my feet.
'Take care!' he warned, laughing. 'You could easily slip here, or lose your
balance. The perfect spot for a murder, I always think.' His laugh sounded so
peculiar that I turned to look at him. He came up to me, saying: 'Suppose I
give you a little push . . . like this--' I stepped back just in time, but
missed my footing and stumbled, staggering on to a crumbling, precarious ledge
lower down. His laughing face hung over me, black against the hot sky. 'The
fall would have been an accident, wouldn't it? No witnesses. Only my word for
what happened. Look how unsteady you are on your feet. Heights seem to affect
you.' When we got down to the bottom again I was sweating, my clothes were
covered in dust.
The girl had set out the food on the grass in the shade of an old walnut tree
growing there. As usual she spoke little. I was not sorry my visit was ending;
there was too much tension in the atmosphere, her proximity was too disturbing.
While we were eating I kept glancing at her, at the silvery blaze of hair, the
pale, almost transparent skin, the prominent, brittle wrist bones. Her husband
had lost his earlier exhilaration and become somewhat morose. He took a
sketchbook and wandered off. I did not understand his moods. Heavy clouds
appeared in the distance; I felt the humidity in the air and knew there would
be a storm before long. My jacket lay on the grass beside me; now I folded it
into a cushion, propped it against the tree trunk and rested my head on it. The
girl was stretched out full length on the grassy bank just below me, her hands
clasped over her forehead, shielding her face from the glare. She kept quite
still, without speaking, her raised arms displaying the slight roughness and
darkness of the shaved armpits, where tiny drops of sweat sparkled like frost.
The thin dress she was wearing showed the slight curves of her childish body: I
could see that she wore nothing underneath it.
She was crouching in front of me, a little lower down the slope, her flesh less
white than the snow. Great ice-cliffs were closing in on all sides. The light
was fluorescent, a cold flat shadowless icelight. No sun, no shadows, no life,
a dead cold. We were in the centre of the advancing circle. I had to try to
save her. I called: 'Come up here--quick!' She turned her head, but without
moving, her hair glinting like tarnished silver in the flat light. I went down
to her, said: 'Don't be so frightened. I promise I'll save you. We must get to
the top of the tower.' She seemed not to understand, perhaps did not hear
because of the rumbling roar of the approaching ice. I got hold of her, pulled
her up the slope: it was easy, she was almost weightless. Outside the ruin I
stopped, holding her with one arm, looked round and saw at once that it was
useless to go any higher. The tower was bound to fall; it would collapse, and
be pulverized instantly under millions of tons of ice. The cold scorched my
lungs, the ice was so near. She was shivering violently, her shoulders were ice
already; I held her closer to me, wrapped both arms round her tight.
Little time was left, but at least we would share the same end. Ice had already
engulfed the forest, the last ranks of trees were splintering. Her silver hair
touched my mouth, she was leaning against me. Then I lost her; my hands could
not find her again. A snapped-off tree trunk was dancing high in the sky,
hurled up hundreds of feet by the impact of the ice. There was a flash,
everything was shaken. My suitcase was lying open, half-packed, on the bed. The
windows of my room were still wide open, the curtains streamed into the room.
Outside the treetops were streaming, the sky had gone dark. I saw no rain, but
thunder still rolled and echoed, and as I looked out lightning flashed again.
The temperature had fallen several degrees since morning. I hurried to put on
my jacket and shut the window.
I had been following the right road, after all. After running like a tunnel
between unpruned hedges that met overhead, it wound through the dark beech wood
to end in front of the house. No light was visible. The place looked derelict,
uninhabited, like the others I had passed. I sounded the horn several times and
waited. It was late, they might be in bed. If she was there I had to see her,
and that was all there was to it. After some delay, the man came and let me in.
He did not seem pleased to see me this time, which was understandable if I had
woken him up. He appeared to be in his dressing gown.
The house was without electricity. He went first, flashing a torch. I kept my
coat on, although the living-room fire gave out some warmth. In the lamplight I
was surprised to see how much he had altered while I had been abroad. He looked
heavier, harder, tougher; the amiable expression had gone. It was not a
dressing gown he was wearing, but the long overcoat of some uniform, which made
him seem unfamiliar. My old suspicions revived; here was someone who was
cashing in on the emergency before it had even arrived. His face did not appear
friendly. I apologized for coming so late, explaining that I had lost my way.
He was in the process of getting drunk. Bottles and glasses stood on a small
table. 'Well, here's to your arrival.' There was no cordiality in his manner or
in his voice, which had a sardonic tone that was new. He poured me a drink and
sat down, the long overcoat draping his knees. I looked for the bulging pocket,
the protruding butt, but nothing of the sort was visible under the coat. We sat
drinking together. I made conversation about my travels, waiting for the girl
to appear. There was no sign of her; not a sound from the rest of the house. He
did not mention her, and I could tell that he refrained deliberately by his
look of malicious amusement. The room I remembered as charming was now
neglected, dirty. Plaster had fallen from the ceiling, there were deep cracks
in the walls as from the effect of blast, black patches where rain had seeped
in, and with it, the devastation outside. When my impatience became
uncontrollable I asked how she was. 'She's dying.' He grinned spitefully at my
exclamation. 'As we all are.' It was his idea of a joke at my expense. I saw
that he meant to prevent our meeting.
I needed to see her; it was vital. I said: 'I'll go now and leave you in peace.
But could you give me something to eat first? I've had nothing since mid-day.'
He went out and in a rough overbearing voice shouted to her to bring food. The
destruction outside was contagious and had infected everything, including their
relationship, and the appearance of the room. She brought a tray with bread and
butter, a plate of ham, and I looked closely to see if her appearance had
changed too. She only looked thinner than ever, and more nearly transparent.
She was completely silent, and seemed frightened, withdrawn, as she had been
when I knew her first. I longed to ask questions, to talk to her alone, but was
not given the chance. The man watched us all the time as he went on drinking.
Alcohol made him quarrelsome; he got angry when I refused to drink any more,
determined to pick a quarrel with me. I knew I ought to go, but my head ached
abominably and made me reluctant to move. I kept pressing my hand over my eyes
and forehead. Evidently the girl noticed this, for she left the room for a
minute, came back with something in the palm of her hand, murmured: 'An aspirin
for your head.' Like a bully, he shouted: 'What are you whispering to him?'
Touched by her thought for me, I would have liked to do more than thank her;
but his scowl was so vicious that I got up to leave.
He did not come to see me off. I felt my way through the darkness by walls and
furniture, faced a pale shimmer of snow when I opened the outer door. It was so
cold that I hurriedly shut myself in the car and put on the heater. Looking up
from the dashboard, I heard her call softly something of which I caught only
the words 'promise' and 'don't forget'. I switched on the headlights, saw her
in the doorway, thin arms clasped round her chest. Her face wore its victim's
look, which was of course psychological, the result of injuries she had
received in childhood; I saw it as the faintest possible hint of bruising on
the extremely delicate, fine, white skin in the region of eyes and mouth. It
was madly attractive to me in a certain way. I had barely caught sight of it
now before the car began moving; I was automatically pressing the starter, not
expecting it to work in the freezing cold. At the same moment, in what I took
for an optical delusion, the black interior of the house prolonged itself into
a black arm and hand, which shot out and grasped her so violently that her
shocked white face cracked to pieces and she tumbled into the dark.
I could not get over the deterioration in their relationship. While she was
happy I had dissociated myself, been outside the situation. Now I felt
implicated, involved with her again.


TWO

I heard that the girl had left home suddenly. No one knew where she was. The
husband thought she might have gone abroad. It was only a guess. He had no
information. I was agitated and asked endless questions, but no concrete facts
emerged. 'I know no more than you. She simply vanished, I suppose she's
entitled to go if she wants to--she's free, white and twenty-one.' He adopted a
facetious tone, I could not tell if he was speaking the truth. The police did
not suspect foul play. There was no reason to think harm had come to her, or
that she had not gone away voluntarily. She was old enough to know her own
mind. People were constantly disappearing; hundreds left home and were not seen
again, many of them women unhappily married. Her marriage was known to have
been breaking up. Almost certainly she was better off now, and only wanted to
be left in peace. Further investigation would be resented and lead to more
trouble.
This was a convenient view for them, it excused them from taking action. But I
did not accept it. She had been conditioned into obedience since early
childhood, her independence destroyed by systematic suppression. I did not
believe her capable of taking such a drastic step on her own initiative: I
suspected pressure from outside. I wished I could talk to someone who knew her
well, but she seemed to have had no close friends.
The husband came to town on some mysterious business, and I asked him to lunch
at my club. We talked for two hours, but in the end I was none the wiser. He
persistently treated the whole affair lightly, said he was glad she had gone.
'Her neurotic behaviour nearly drove me demented. I'd had all I could take. She
refused to see a psychiatrist. Finally she walked out on me without a word. No
explanation. No warning.' He spoke as if he was the injured party. 'She went
her own way without considering me, so I'm not worrying about her. She won't
come back, that's one thing certain.' While he was away from home, I took the
opportunity of driving down to the house and going through the things in her
room, but found nothing in the way of a clue. There was just the usual
collection of pathetic rubbish: a china bird; a broken string of fake pearls;
snapshots in an old chocolate box. One of these, in which a lake reflected
perfectly her face and her shining hair, I put into my wallet.
Somehow or other I had to find her; the fact remained. I felt the same
compulsive urge that had driven me straight to the country when I first
arrived. There was no rational explanation, I could not account for it. It was
a sort of craving that had to be satisfied.
I abandoned all my own affairs. From now on my business was to search for her.
Nothing else mattered. Certain sources of possible information were still
available. Hairdressers. Clerks who kept records of transport bookings. Those
fringe characters. I went to the places such people frequented, stood about
playing the fruit machines until I saw a chance of speaking. Money helped. So
did intuition. No clue was too slender to follow up. The approaching emergency
made it all the more urgent to find her quickly. I could not get her out of my
head.
I had not seen all the things I remembered about her. During my first visit I
was in their living-room, talking about the Indris, my favourite subject. The
man listened. She went to and fro arranging flowers. On an impulse I said the
pair of them resembled the lemurs, both so friendly and charming, and living
together so happily here in the trees. He laughed. She looked horrified and ran
out through the french window, silvery hair floating behind her, her bare legs
flashing pale. The secret, shady garden, hidden away in seclusion and silence,
was a pleasant cool retreat from the heat of summer. Then suddenly it was
unnaturally, fearfully cold. The masses of dense foliage all round became
prison walls, impassable circular green ice-walls, surging towards her; just
before they closed in, I caught the terrified glint of her eyes.
On a winter day she was in the studio, posing for him in the nude, her arms
raised in a graceful position. To hold it for any length of time must have been
a strain, I wondered how she managed to keep so still; until I saw the cords
attached to her wrists and ankles. The room was cold. There was thick frost on
the window panes and snow piled up on the sill outside. He wore the long
uniform coat. She was shivering. When she asked, 'May I have a rest?' her voice
had a pathetic tremor. He frowned, looked at his watch before he put down his
palette. 'All right. That'll do for now. You can dress.' He untied her. The
cords had left deep red angry rings on the white flesh. Her movements were slow
and clumsy from cold, she fumbled awkwardly with buttons, suspenders. This
seemed to annoy him. He turned away from her sharply, his face irritable. She
kept glancing nervously at him, her mouth was unsteady, her hands would not
stop shaking.
Another time the two were together in a cold room. As usual, he wore the long
coat. It was night, freezing hard. He had a book in his hand, she was doing
nothing. She looked cold and miserable, huddled up in a thick grey loden coat
with a red and blue check lining. The room was silent and full of tension. It
could be felt that neither of them had spoken for a long time. Outside the
window, a twig snapped in the iron frost with a sound like a handclap. He
dropped the book and got up to put on a record. Instantly she began to protest.
'Oh, no! Not that awful singing, for heaven's sake!' He ignored her, went on
with what he was doing. The turntable started revolving. It was a record I had
given them from my tape recording of the lemurs' song. To me, the extraordinary
jungle music was lovely, mysterious, magical. To her it was a sort of torture,
apparently. She covered her ears with her hands, winced at the high notes,
looked more and more distraught. When the record ended and he re-started it
without a moment's pause, she cried out as if he had struck her, 'No! I won't
listen to it all over again!' threw herself at the mechanism, stopped it so
abruptly that the voices expired in uncanny wailing. He faced her angrily.
'What the hell do you think you're doing? Have you gone off your head?' 'You
know I can't stand that horrible record.' She seemed almost beside herself.
'You only play it because I hate it so much. . .' Tears sprang unchecked from
her eyes, she brushed them away carelessly with her hand.
He glared at her, said: 'Why should I sit in silence for hours just because you
don't choose to open your mouth?' His angry voice was full of indignant
resentment. 'What's wrong with you, anyhow, these days? Why can't you behave
like a normal being?' She did not answer, dropped her face in her hands. Tears
dripped between her fingers. He gazed at her with a disgusted expression. 'I
might as well be in solitary confinement as alone with you here. But I warn you
I'm not going to put up with it much longer. I've had enough. I'm sick and
tired of the way you're carrying on. Pull yourself together, or else--' With a
threatening scowl, he went out, banging the door behind him. A silence
followed, while she stood like a lost child, tears wet on her cheeks. Next she
started wandering aimlessly round the room, stopped by the window, pulled the
curtain aside, then cried out in amazement.
Instead of the darkness, she faced a stupendous sky-conflagration, an
incredible glacial dream-scene. Cold coruscations of rainbow fire pulsed
overhead, shot through by shafts of pure incandescence thrown out by mountains
of solid ice towering all round. Closer, the trees round the house, sheathed in
ice, dripped and sparkled with weird prismatic jewels, reflecting the vivid
changing cascades above. Instead of the familiar night sky, the aurora borealis
formed a blazing, vibrating roof of intense cold and colour, beneath which the
earth was trapped with all its inhabitants, walled in by those impassable
glittering ice-cliffs. The world had become an arctic prison from which no
escape was possible, all its creatures trapped as securely as were the trees,
already lifeless inside their deadly resplendent armour.
Despairingly she looked all round. She was completely encircled by the
tremendous ice walls, which were made fluid by explosions of blinding light, so
that they moved and changed with a continuous liquid motion, advancing in
torrents of ice, avalanches as big as oceans, flooding everywhere over the
doomed world. Wherever she looked, she saw the same fearful encirclement,
soaring battlements of ice, an overhanging ring of frigid, fiery, colossal
waves about to collapse upon her. Frozen by the deathly cold emanating from the
ice, dazzled by the blaze of crystalline ice-light, she felt herself becoming
part of the polar vision, her structure becoming one with the structure of ice
and snow. As her fate, she accepted the world of ice, shining, shimmering,
dead; she resigned herself to the triumph of glaciers and the death of her
world.
It was essential for me to find her without delay. The situation was alarming,
the atmosphere tense, the emergency imminent. There was talk of a secret act of
aggression by some foreign power, but no one knew what had actually happened.
The government would not disclose the facts. I was informed privately of a
steep rise in radioactive pollution, pointing to the explosion of a nuclear
device, but of an unknown type, the consequences of which could not be
accurately predicted. It was possible that polar modifications had resulted,
and would lead to a substantial climatic change due to the refraction of solar
heat. If the melting antarctic ice cap flowed over the South Pacific and
Alantic oceans, a vast ice-mass would be created, reflecting the sun's rays and
throwing them back into outer space, thus depriving the earth of warmth. In
town, everything was chaotic and contradictory. News from abroad was censored,
but travel was left unrestricted. Confusion was increased by a spate of new and
conflicting regulations, and by the arbitrary way controls were imposed or
lifted. The one thing that would have clarified the position was an over-all
picture of world events; but this was prohibited by the determination of the
politicians to ban all foreign news. My impression was that they had lost their
heads, did not know how to deal with the approaching danger, and hoped to keep
the public in ignorance of its exact nature until a plan had been evolved.
No doubt people would have been more concerned, and would have made greater
efforts to find out what was taking place in other countries, if, at home, they
had not been obliged to contend with the fuel shortage, the power cuts, the
breakdown of transport, and the rapid diversion of supplies to the black
market.
There was no sign of a break in the abnormal cold. My room was reasonably warm,
but even in hotels heating was being reduced to a minimum, and, outside, the
erratic, restricted services hampered my investigations. The river had been
frozen over for weeks, the total paralysis of the docks was a serious problem.
All essential commodities were in short supply; rationing, at least of fuel and
food, could not be delayed much longer, despite the reluctance of those in
power to resort to unpopular measures.
Everyone who could do so was leaving in search of better conditions. No more
passages were available, either by sea or air; there were long waiting lists
for all ships and planes. I had no proof that the girl was already abroad. On
the whole it seemed unlikely she would have managed to leave the country, and
an obscure train of thought suggested that she might embark on a certain
vessel.
The port was a long way off, to reach it involved a long complicated journey. I
was delayed, got there, after travelling all night, only an hour before sailing
time. The passengers were already aboard, crowding the decks with friends who
were seeing them off. The first thing I had to do was to speak to the captain.
He turned out to be maddeningly talkative. While I became more and more
impatient, he complained at great length about the way the authorities allowed
overcrowding: it was a danger to his ship, unfair to himself, to the company,
the passengers, the insurance people. That was his business. As soon as I got
permission to get on with my own, I made a methodical search of the ship, but
without finding a trace of the person I wanted.
Finally I gave up in despair and went out on deck. Too tired and disheartened
to push through the crowds of people milling about there, I stood by the rail,
overcome by a sudden urge to abandon the whole affair. I had never really had a
valid reason for supposing the girl would be on this ship. Suddenly it seemed
neither sensible, nor even sane, to continue a search based solely on vague
surmise; particularly as my attitude to its object was so undefined. When I
considered that imperative need I felt for her, as for a missing part of
myself, it appeared less like love than an inexplicable aberration, the sign of
some character-flaw I ought to eradicate, instead of letting it dominate me.
At this moment a big black-backed gull sailed past, almost brushing my cheek
with its wing tip, as if on purpose to draw my attention and eyes after it up
to the boat deck. At once I saw her there, looking away from me, where no one
had been before; and everything I had just been thinking was swept out of my
head by a wave of excitement, my old craving for her returned. I was convinced
it was she without even seeing her face; no other girl in the world had such
dazzling hair, or was so thin that her fragility could be seen through a thick
grey coat. I simply had to reach her, it was all I could think of. Envying the
gull's effortless flight, I plunged straight into the solid mass of humanity
separating me from her, and forced my way through. I had hardly any time, in a
moment the boat would be sailing. Visitors were leaving already, forming a
strong cross current I had to fight. My one idea was to get to the boatdeck
before it was too late. In my anxiety, I must have pushed people aside. Hostile
remarks were made, a fist shaken. I tried to explain my urgency to those who
obstructed me, but they would not listen. Three tough looking young men linked
arms and aggressively barred my way, their expressions threatening. I had not
meant to offend, hardly knew what I was doing. I was thinking only of her.
Suddenly an official voice shouted through a loud speaker: 'All visitors
ashore! The gangway will be raised in exactly two minutes.' The ship's siren
sounded an earsplitting blast. An immediate rush followed. It was quite
impossible to resist the human flood surging towards the gangway. I was caught
up in the stampede, dragged along with it, off the boat, and on to the quay.
Standing at the water's edge, I soon saw her high above me, considerably
further off now. The ship had already moved away from the shore and was
gathering speed every second, already divided from me by a strip of water too
wide to jump. In desperation, I shouted and waved my arms, trying to attract
her attention. It was hopeless. A whole sea of arms waved all round me,
innumerable voices were shouting unintelligibly. I saw her turn to speak to
somebody who had just joined her, at the same time pulling a hood over her
head, so that her hair was hidden. Immediate doubts invaded me, and increased
as I watched her. After all, perhaps she was not the right girl; she seemed too
self-possessed. But I was not certain.
The boat was now beginning the turn that would bring it round facing the mouth
of the harbour, leaving behind it a curving track of smoother water, like the
swath left by a scythe. I stood staring after it, although cold had driven the
passengers off the decks and there was no more hope of recognition. I dimly
remembered what I had been thinking just before I caught sight of her, but only
as one might recall an incident from a dream. Once again the urgency of the
search had reclaimed me; I was totally absorbed in that obsessional need, as
for a lost, essential portion of my own being. Everything else in the world
seemed immaterial.
All round me people were walking away, stamping their feet in the cold. I
hardly noticed the mass departure. It did not occur to me to leave the edge of
the water, over which I continued to gaze at the vessel's diminishing shape. I
had been an utter fool. I was furious with myself for letting it go without
discovering the identity of the girl on board. Now I would never be sure
whether she had, or had not, been the right one. And if she had been, how would
I ever find her again? A mournful hoot travelled across the water: the ship was
leaving the protection of the harbour, heading out into the open sea. Already
meeting the off-shore rollers, it kept disappearing behind grey masses of water
surging along the horizon. It looked absurdly small, a toy boat. I lost sight
of it, my eyes could not find it again. It was lost irretrievably.
I only became aware that everyone else had gone and that I was alone there,
when two policemen approached, marching along side by side, and pointed to a
sign, 'Loitering on the waterfront strictly forbidden: War Department.' 'Why
are you hanging about here? Can't you read?' Needless to say, they refused to
believe that I had not seen it. Hugely tall in their helmets, they stood on
each side, so close that their guns stuck into me, and demanded my papers.
These were in order. There was nothing against me. Nevertheless, my conduct had
been suspicious, they insisted on writing down my name and address. Again I had
acted stupidly, this time by drawing attention to myself. Now that my name had
been noted, it would appear in the records; I would be known to the police
everywhere, my movements would be kept under observation. It would be a serious
handicap in my search.
As the two men hustled me through the gates, something made me look up at a row
of big black-backed gulls perched on a wall, all facing into the wind and
pointing out to sea, as motionless as if they had been stuffed and put up there
to act as a message. On the spot I decided to leave the country before any of
my visas lapsed or were cancelled. No particular place seemed more or less
promising than another as a base from which to start searching. But to attempt
to operate from here while under suspicion would surely invite failure.
I had to leave at once, before the police report circulated. It could not have
been done through the normal channels. By employing other methods, I managed to
board a northbound cargo boat carrying a few passengers, and booked to the end
of the voyage. The purser was willing to vacate his cabin for a consideration.
Next day, at the first port of the trip, I went on deck to watch our arrival. I
remembered the complaints I had been forced to listen to about overcrowding
when I saw a lot of people packed together on the deck below, waiting to
disembark. Twelve was the authorized number of passengers. I wondered how many
more were on board.
It was extremely cold. Loose fragments of pack ice drifted past in the green
water. Everything was misty and indistinct. The landing-stage was quite close,
but the buildings at the end of the jetty looked insubstantial, amorphous. A
girl in a heavy grey coat with a hood was standing a little apart from the
other passengers, leaning on the rail. Occasionally a fold of the coat would
blow back, showing a quilted check lining. It was the coat I noticed; although
I knew perfectly well that such coats had become almost a uniform among women
since the start of the cold, and were to be seen everywhere.
The mist began to lift and break up, the sun would shine later. A rugged
coastline appeared with many inlets and jagged rocks, snow-covered mountains
behind. There were many small islands, some of which floated up and became
clouds, while formations of cloud or mist descended and anchored themselves in
the sea. The white snowy landscape below, and above the canopy of misty white
light, the effect of an oriental painting, nothing solid about it. The town
appeared to consist of ruins collapsing on one another in shapeless disorder, a
town of sandcastles, wrecked by the tide. A great wall which had protected it
was broken in many places, both ends subsiding uselessly into the water. The
place had once been important. Its fortifications had lain in ruins for
centuries. It was still of some historical interest.
Sudden silence fell. The engines had stopped. The boat was still moving forward
under its own momentum. I heard the faint swish of water against the sides, the
plangent crying of sea birds, that sad northern sound. Otherwise all was
silent. No sounds of traffic, of bells or voices, came from the land. The town
of ruins waited in utter silence under the brooding mountains. I thought of
long narrow ancient ships, vast collections of loot preserved in barrows,
winged helmets, drinking horns, great heavy ornaments of gold and silver, piles
of fossilized bones. It looked a place of the past, of the dead.
There was a shout from the bridge. On the jetty a group of sullen-faced men
rose out of the ground. They were armed and wore uniform: black padded tunics,
belted tight at the waist, high boots, fur caps. The knives in their belts
caught the light as they moved. They looked outlandish, even menacing. I heard
somebody say they were the warden's men, which meant nothing; I had not heard
of this warden. Their presence surprised me since private armies were forbidden
by law. Ropes were thrown; they caught them and made them fast. The gangway
crashed down. A slight stir started among the passengers, who picked up
luggage, got out passports and papers, began a slow shuffling progress towards
a barrier that had been set up.
Only the girl in the grey coat did not concern herself with landing, did not
change her position. As the others moved forward and she was left isolated, my
interest increased, I could not detach my attention from her, kept on watching.
What most struck me was her complete stillness. Such a passive attitude,
suggesting both resistance and resignation, did not seem entirely normal in a
young girl. She could not have been more motionless if she had been tied to the
rail, and I thought how easily bonds could be hidden by the voluminous coat.
A bright strand of glittering blonde hair, almost white, escaped from the hood
and blew loose in the wind; I felt a sudden excitement; but reminded myself
that many northerners were extremely fair. All the same, my interest now became
compelling, I was longing to see her face. She would have to look up towards me
before that could happen.
The passengers' forward movement was interrupted. Men in uniform came aboard
and cleared a way through them, demanding room for the warden, shouting
peremptory orders. Space was made for a tall man, yellow-haired, handsome in a
tough, hawk-hard northern fashion, his height jutting above those near him. His
arrogant manner, his total disregard for the feelings of others, made an
unpleasant impression. As if he sensed my criticism, he glanced up for a
second. His eyes were startling pieces of bright blue ice. I saw that he was
making for the girl in the grey coat, the one person who had not seen him.
Everyone else was staring. When he called out, 'Why are you standing there?
Have you gone to sleep?' she swung round as if terribly startled. 'Hurry up!
The car's waiting.' He went close and touched her. He was smiling, but I
detected a hint of a threat in his voice and behaviour. She hung back, seemed
unwilling to go with him. He linked arms with her, apparently friendly, but
really forcing her forward against her will, pulling her along with him through
the bunched, staring people. She still did not look up, I could not see her
expression, but I could imagine his iron grip on her thin wrist. They left the
ship before anyone else, and were immediately driven off in a big black car.
I had been standing there as if petrified. Suddenly now I made a decision. It
seemed worth taking a chance. Though without having seen her face. ... I had no
other clue to follow, in any case.
I ran down to the cabin, sent for the purser, told him I had changed my plans.
'I'm going ashore here.' He looked at me as though I was out of my mind.
'Please yourself.' He shrugged his shoulders indifferently, but could not quite
conceal an incipient grin. He had already received his money. Now he would be
able to collect a second payment from somebody else for the remainder of the
voyage.
I hurriedly threw into my suitcase the few things I had unpacked.


THREE

Carrying my suitcase, I walked into the town. Silence obtruded itself. Nothing
moved. The devastation was even greater than it had seemed from the boat. Not a
building intact. Wreckage heaped in blank spaces where houses had been. Walls
had crumbled; steps ascended and stopped in mid-air; arches opened on to deep
craters. Little had been done to repair this wholesale destruction. Only the
main streets were clear of rubble, the rest obliterated. Faint tracks, like the
tracks of animals, but made by human beings, twisted among the debris. I looked
in vain for somebody to direct me. The whole place seemed deserted. A train
whistle at last guided me to the station, a small makeshift building
constructed with materials salvaged from ruins, which reminded me of a
discarded film set. Even here there was no sign of life, though presumably a
train had just left. It was hard to believe the place was really in use; that
anything really functioned. I was aware of an uncertainty of the real, in my
surroundings and in myself. What I saw had no solidity, it was all made of mist
and nylon, with nothing behind.
I went on to the platform. They must have dynamited some of the ruins to lay
the track. I could see the single line running out of the town, crossing a
strip of open ground before it entered the fir forest. This fragile link with
the world did not inspire confidence. I had the feeling it stopped just beyond
the first trees. The mountains rose close behind. I shouted, 'Is anyone here?'
A man appeared from somewhere, made a threatening gesture. 'You're trespassing-
-get out!' I explained that I had just come off the boat and wanted to find a
room. He stared, hostile, suspicious, uncouth, saying nothing. I asked the way
to the main street. In a sulky voice I could hardly understand he muttered a
few words, staring at me the whole time as if I had dropped from Mars.
I walked on with my bag, came to an open square where people were going about.
The men's black tunics were variations of those I had already seen, and most of
the wearers carried knives or guns. The women also wore black, producing a
gloomy effect. All the faces were blank and unsmiling. For the first time I saw
signs that some buildings were occupied, a few even had glass in the windows.
There were market stalls and small shops: wooden huts and lean-tos had been
tacked on to some of the patched-up ruins. A café was open at the end of the
square, and there was a cinema, shut, displaying a tattered advertisement of a
year-old programme. This evidently was the living heart of the town; the rest
was just the remains of the dead past.
I invited the proprietor of the café to drink with me, hoping to establish
good relations before I asked for a room. All these people seemed insular and
suspicious, antagonistic to strangers. We drank the local brandy made out of
plums, potent and fiery, a good drink for a cold climate. He was a big, robust
man, better than a peasant. At first I could hardly get a word out of him, but
over the second glass he relaxed enough to ask why I had come. 'Nobody ever
comes here; we have nothing to attract foreigners--only ruins.' I said: 'The
ruins of your town are famous. They're the reason for my coming. I'm making a
study of them for a learned society.' I had decided beforehand to say this.
'You mean people in other countries are interested?' 'Certainly. This town is a
place of historic importance.' He was flattered, as I expected. 'That's true.
We have a glorious war record.' 'And also a record of discovery. Did you know
that a map has been found recently which indicates that your long boats crossed
the Atlantic and were the first to reach the new world?' 'You expect to find
proof of this in the ruins?' It had not occurred to me, but I assented. 'I know
of course that I must get permits: everything must be done correctly.
Unfortunately I don't know who's the right man to approach.' Without hesitation
he said: 'You must ask the warden. He controls everything.' Here was an
unexpected stroke of luck. 'How do I get in touch with him?' I had a vision of
an iron hand gripping a girl's thin wrist, crushing the brittle prominent
bones. 'That's simple. You make an appointment through one of the secretaries
at the High House.' I was delighted by such good fortune. I had been prepared
to wait and scheme for a chance of seeing this man; now the opportunity had
presented itself at the very beginning.
The business of the room was also settled without difficulty. I was having a
run of good luck. Although the proprietor could not accommodate me himself, his
sister who lived nearby had a spare room I could rent. 'She's a widow and can
do with the extra money, you understand.' He went off to telephone to her;
returned after rather a long absence, saying that it was all arranged. He would
provide my two main meals at the café; breakfast would be brought to my room.
'You won't be disturbed there while you're working, it's very quiet. The house
looks away from the street, faces the water; and nobody ever goes there.' His
co-operation was valuable, so to keep the conversation going I asked why people
avoided the vicinity of the fjord. 'Because they're afraid of the dragon that
lives at the bottom.' I looked at him, thought he was joking; but his face was
perfectly serious, his voice had been matter-of-fact. I had never before met
anyone who owned a telephone and believed in dragons. It amused me, and also
contributed to my sense of the unreal.
The room proved to be dark and devoid of comfort or convenience. It was not
warm enough. However, it had a bed, a table and chair--the basic necessities. I
was lucky to get it as no other accommodation was available. The sister looked
older and much less sophisticated than her brother, who must have persuaded her
to take me in against her will during their long talk on the telephone. She was
evidently reluctant to admit a foreigner to the house where she lived alone; I
could feel her suspicious dislike. To avoid trouble I paid the exorbitant price
she asked without question, a week in advance.
I asked for the keys, saying I would have a duplicate cut for the outer door: I
had to be independent. She brought the two keys, but gave me only the key of my
own door, hiding the other one in the palm of her hand. I told her to hand it
over. She refused. I insisted. She became stubborn and retreated into the
kitchen. I followed and took the key from her forcibly. I did not much care for
this sort of behaviour, but a principle was involved. She would not oppose me
again.
I went out and walked about, exploring the town: the empty lanes silent between
shapeless shapes of decay, the ruined forts jutting into the greengage sea, the
huge slab-steps of a giant's staircase where the great wall had fallen,
subsiding in solid sections. Everywhere the ubiquitous ruins, decayed
fortifications, evidences of a warlike bloodthirsty past. I searched for
buildings of a more recent date. There were none. The dwindling population
lived like rats in the ruins of a lost martial supremacy. If one place became
uninhabitable its occupants moved to another. The community was gradually dying
out, each year its numbers declined. There were enough disintegrating
structures to last them out. At first it was hard to distinguish the inhabited
buildings; I learnt to look for the signs of occupation, the reinforced door,
the boarded-up windows.
I made an appointment to see the warden at the High House, which dominated the
town, a fortresslike mass built at its highest point. At the time agreed, I
climbed a steep road, the only one that led to it. From the outside the place
looked like an armed fort, enormously massive, thick walls, no windows, some
narrow slits high up that might have been meant for machine guns. Batteries
flanked the entrance, apparently trained on the road. I assumed they were
relics of some old campaign, though they did not look especially obsolete. I
had spoken to a secretary on the telephone; but now was met by four armed
guards in black tunics, who escorted me down a long corridor, two walking in
front, two behind. It was dark. High above, thin pencils of daylight, entering
through the slits in the outer wall, dimly revealed glimpses of other
corridors, galleries, stairs, bridgelike landings, at different levels,
radiating in different directions. The invisible ceiling must have been
enormously high, the full height of the building, for all these indistinct
ramifications were far overhead. Something moved at the end of one vista: a
girl's figure. I rushed after her as she started to climb some stairs, her
silvery hair lifting, glimmering in the darkness, at every step.
The short steep stair led to one room only, large, sparsely furnished, its
polished floor bare like a dance floor. I was immediately struck by the
unnatural silence, a curious hushed quality in the air, which reduced her
movements to mouselike scratchings. Not a sound penetrated from outside or from
other parts of the building. I was puzzled, until it dawned on me that the room
had been sound-proofed, so that whatever took place there would be inaudible
beyond its four walls.
Then it at once became obvious why this particular room had been allotted to
her.
She was in bed, not asleep, waiting. A faint pinkish glow came from a lamp
beside her. The wide bed stood on a platform, bed and platform alike covered in
sheepskin, facing a great mirror nearly as long as the wall. Alone here, where
nobody could hear her, where nobody was meant to hear, she was cut off from all
contact, totally vulnerable, at the mercy of the man who came in without
knocking, without a word his cold, very bright blue eyes pouncing on hers in
the glass She crouched motionless, staring silently into the mirror, as if
mesmerized. The hypnotic power of his eyes could destroy her will, already
weakened by the mother who for years had persistently crushed it into
submission. Forced since childhood into a victim's pattern of thought and
behaviour, she was defenceless against his aggressive will, which was able to
take complete possession of her. I saw it happen.
He approached the bed with unhurried steps. She did not move until he bent over
her, when she twisted away abruptly as if trying to escape, buried her face in
the pillow. His hand reached out, slid over her shoulder, strong fingers
feeling along her jawbone, gripping, tilting, forcing her head up. She resisted
violently, in sudden terror, twisting and turning wildly, struggling against
his strength. He did nothing at all, let he go on fighting. Her feeble
struggles amused him, he knew they would not last long. He looked on in
silence, in half-smiling amusement, always tilting her face with slight but
inescapable pressure, while she exhausted herself.
Suddenly she gave in, worn out, beaten; she was panting her face was wet. He
tightened his grip slightly, compelled her to look straight at him. To bring
the thing to a finish, he stared into her dilated eyes, implacably forced into
them his own arrogant, ice-blue gaze. This was the moment of her surrender,
opposition collapsed at this point, when she seemed to fall and drown in those
cold blue mesmeric depths. Now she had no more will. He could do what he liked
with her.
He leaned further, knelt on the bed, pushed her down with his hands on her
shoulders. Will-less, she submitted to him, even to the extent of making small
compliant movements fitting her body to his. She was dazed, she hardly knew
what was happening, her normal state of consciousness interrupted, lost, the
nature of her surrender not understood. He was intent only on his enjoyment.
Later she did not move, gave no indication of life, lying exposed on the ruined
bed as on a slab in a mortuary. Sheets and blankets spilled on to the floor,
trailed over the edge of the dais. Her head hung over the edge of the bed in a
slightly unnatural position, the neck slightly twisted in a way that suggested
violence, the bright hair twisted into a sort of rope by his hands. He sat with
his hand upon her, asserting his right to his prey. When his fingers passed
over her naked body, lingering on thighs and breasts, she was shaken by a long
painful shudder; then she went still again.
He lifted her head with one hand, looked into her face for a moment, let the
head fall back on the pillow; it lay as it fell. He stood up, moved away from
the bed; his foot caught in the fold of a blanket, he kicked it back and went
on to the door. He had not spoken a single word since he entered the room, and
he left it without a sound, apart from the faint click of the closing door. To
her, this silence was one of the most terrifying things about him, in some way
associated with his power over her.
I wondered where I was being taken. The place was colossal, the passages wound
on and on. We passed the trap doors of oubliettes, cells hacked out of the
rock. The walls of these hutches were running with water, with some noisome
exudation. Perilous steps led down to still deeper dungeons. We went through
several pairs of huge doors, which the guards in front unlocked and the others
slammed shut behind us.
The warden received me in a civilized room. It was spacious and well-
proportioned, the wood floor reflecting dim old chandeliers. The windows faced
away from the town, over parklike grounds, sloping down to the distant fjord.
His perfectly-fitting black tunic was of superb material, his high boots shone
like mirrors. He was wearing the coloured ribbon of some order I did not know.
This time my impression was more favourable; the arrogant look I disliked was
less in evidence although it was clear that he was a born ruler, a law unto
himself, not to be judged by the usual standards. 'What can I do for you?' He
greeted me with formal politeness, his blue eyes looked me straight in the
face. I told him the story I had prepared. He agreed at once to have the
necessary permits made out and signed, I would get them tomorrow. On his own
initiative he suggested adding a note to the effect that I was to be given help
in my investigations. To me it seemed superfluous. He said: 'You don't know
these people. They are naturally lawless and have an innate dislike of
strangers, their ways are violent and archaic. I've tried hard to introduce
more modern attitudes. But it's useless, they're embedded in the past like
Lot's wife in her pillar of salt; you can't detach them from it.' I thanked
him; at the same time I was thinking about the guards, who hardly seemed to fit
in with his enlightened outlook.
He remarked that I had chosen a strange time for my visit I asked why. 'The ice
will be here very soon. The harbour will freeze, we shall be cut off.' He
flashed a blue glance at me. Something had not been said. He had a trick of
blinking his very bright eyes, which then seemed to emit blue flames. He went
on: 'You may be stranded here longer than you bargained for.' Again the sharp
look, as if something more were implied. I told him: 'I'm only staying for a
week or so. I don't expect to find anything new. It's more a matter of getting
the atmosphere.' In spite of my original aversion, I suddenly had a curious
sense of contact with him, almost as though some personal link existed between
us. The feeling was so unexpected, unaccountable and confusing that I added,
'Please don't misunderstand me,' without knowing quite what I meant. He seemed
gratified, smiled, and at once became more friendly. 'So we speak the same
language. Good. I'm glad you've come. We need closer contact in this country
with the sophisticated nations. This is a beginning.' Still somewhat hazy as to
what we were talking about, I stood up to go, thanking him again. He shook my
hand. 'You must come and dine one evening. Let me know in the meantime if I can
be of any further service to you.'
I was jubilant. My luck was holding. I seemed almost to have attained my object
already, I was sure of a chance of seeing the girl. If the dinner invitation
failed to materialize, I could always fall back on his final offer.


FOUR

The signed permits arrived the next day. The warden had initialled an
additional sentence saying that I was to receive every assistance. This
impressed the café proprietor, and I left it to him to circulate the message.
I began making notes on the town: my performance had to be convincing and
thorough. I had sometimes thought vaguely of writing about the fascinating
singing lemurs; now I had a perfect opportunity to describe them before the
memory faded. Each day I wrote a little about my surroundings and a lot more on
the other subject. There was nothing else to do, I would have been bored
without this occupation, which became an absorbing interest and kept me busy
for hours. The time passed surprisingly fast. In some ways I was better off
than I had been at home. It was exceedingly cold, but I was warm in my room,
having organized a daily supply of logs for the stove. No fuel problem existed
here, close to these great forests To think of the ice coming nearer all the
time was very disturbing. But for the present the harbour remained open,
occasional ships came and went. From these I sometimes managed to obtain a few
delicacies to supplement my meals at the café which were ample, but lacking in
variety. I had arranged for my food to be served in a sort of alcove off the
main room where I was out of the noise and smoke and had a certain amount of
privacy.
The work I was supposed to be doing among the ruins enabled me to keep the High
House unobtrusively under observation. I never once caught sight of the girl,
though on several occasions I saw the warden emerge, always accompanied by his
bodyguard. He usually jumped straight into his big car and was driven off at
tremendous speed. I gathered that threats from political opponents accounted
for these precautions.
After two or three days I became impatient. I was getting nowhere and time was
short. As she never seemed to leave the High House, I should have to get in.
But no invitation arrived. I was trying to decide on the best excuse for
approaching the warden again when he sent one of his guards to fetch me to
lunch. The man intercepted me on my way to the café at midday. I disliked the
absence of notice, and the whole imperious style of the summons and its
delivery. It was more a command than an invitation, and, feeling obliged to
protest, I said it was hardly possible to cancel the meal already prepared and
waiting for me at that very moment. Instead of answering me, the guard shouted.
Two more black tunics appeared from nowhere: the wearer of one was sent to
explain things to the café proprietor, while the other stationed himself
beside me. I now had no alternative but to go with this double escort. Of
course I was glad to do so, it was what I wanted. But I would have preferred
less high-handed treatment.
The warden led me straight into a large dining hall with a long table intended
for twenty people. He took his chair at the head, an imposing figure. I was
seated beside him. A third place was laid opposite. Seeing me glance at it, he
said: 'A young friend from your country is staying with me; I thought you might
like to meet her.' He gave me one of his piercing looks as I replied calmly
that I would be delighted. Inwardly I was exulting; it seemed almost too good
to be true, the climax of my good fortune, to be spared the tricky business of
asking to see her.
Dry Martinis were brought in a frosted jug. Immediately afterwards someone came
in, whispered something, gave him a note. His face changed as he read the few
words, he ripped the paper across and across, reducing it to minute fragments
'It appears the young person is indisposed.' I hid my disappointment by
murmuring something polite. He was frowning furiously, obviously could not bear
to be thwarted over the least thing; his anger pervaded the atmosphere. Saying
no more to me, he signed for the extra setting to be removed, glasses and
cutlery were whipped out of sight. The food was served, but he hardly touched
what was on his plate, sat pounding the shreds of paper into a pulp with his
clenched fist. I became more and more annoyed the longer he ignored me,
particularly resenting this additional rudeness after the peremptory way he had
sent for me. I wanted to get up and walk out, but knew it would be fatal to
break off relations at this stage. To distract myself, I thought of the girl,
decided I was probably responsible for her absence; she must have guessed who I
was, if she had not known all along. I tried to imagine her alone in a silent
room overhead. But she seemed miles away, a dream figure, inaccessible and
unreal.
The warden gradually became calmer, although his expression remained
forbidding. I would not speak first, but waited for him to acknowledge my
presence. A joint of excellent young lamb was carved, and while we were eating
he referred abruptly to my investigations. 'I notice you confine them to the
ruins in my vicinity.' I was disconcerted, I had not known I was being watched.
Luckily there was a ready-made answer 'As you know, these have always been the
administrative buildings, so anything of interest is more likely to turn up
here than anywhere else.' He said nothing, but made the sound of a player whose
opponent claims a dubious point in the game. I could not tell whether my reply
had satisfied him or not.
Coffee was put on the table, and to my surprise, everybody withdrew from the
room. I felt apprehensive, I could not imagine what he could have to say to me
in private. His mood appeared to have hardened; he looked formidable, cold,
distant. It was difficult to believe he had ever showed friendliness when he
remarked ominously: 'People who try to trick me usually regret it; I'm not
easily taken in.' His voice was controlled and quiet, but the threat I had
detected in it on a former occasion had become open. I said I did not
understand what he meant; the obvious implication did not apply to me. He
subjected me to a prolonged stare, which I returned with more coolness than I
was feeling. An aura of danger and duplicity surrounded him, I was on my guard.
Pushing aside his cup, he leaned his elbows on the table, brought his face
close to mine and went on gazing fixedly at me without a word. His eyes were
startlingly bright, I could feel them trying to dominate me, and found it hard
not to lower my own. He must have practised hypnosis at some time: I had to
keep up a sustained effort of resistance. It was a relief when he drew back a
little, and said bluntly: 'I want you to do something for me.' 'What on earth
can I possibly do for you?' I was astonished. 'Listen. This is a small, poor,
backward country, without resources. In an emergency we would be lost without
the help of the big powers. Unfortunately the big powers consider us too
insignificant to be of any interest. I want you to convince your government
that we can be useful, if only because of our geographical position. I'm
assuming you have the necessary influence?' I supposed I had; but I was taken
aback, I had not expected anything like this. My instinct was against it, and I
began: 'That sort of thing's not my line at all--' He interrupted impatiently:
'I'm simply asking you to point out to your politicians the advantage of co-
operating with us. It should be easy. They've only got to look at the map.'
Before I could think what to say, he pressed me again with increased
impatience: 'Well, will you do it?' His habit of dominance and his personal
magnetism made it virtually impossible to refuse; almost involuntarily, I made
a sound of assent. 'Good. It's a bargain. Of course you'll receive an adequate
return.' As if to clinch the matter, he stood up and held out his hand, adding:
'You'd better write immediately to prepare the ground.' He picked up a small
silver bell, rang it vigorously, people came trooping into the room. As he went
to meet them, he dismissed me with a casual nod. I felt confused and uneasy,
and was glad to get out of the place. I did not like this new turn of events, I
had the impression my luck was changing.
A day or two later his big car stopped beside me and he looked out, wearing a
magnificent furlined overcoat. He wanted a word with me; would I come to the
High House? I got in, we raced up to the entrance.
We went into a room full of people waiting to speak to him: the guards moved
them back so that we could pass through to a room beyond. I heard him mutter,
'Get rid of this fellow after five minutes,' before he dismissed his men. To me
he said: 'I presume you've written to someone about that bargain of ours?' I
muttered something evasive. In quite a different tone he rapped out: 'The post
office informs me you have not communicated with any useful person. I took you
for a man of your word; it seems I was mistaken.' To avoid a quarrel I took no
notice of the insult, replied peaceably: 'I haven't heard yet what I'm to get
out of the bargain.' Curtly he told me to state my terms. I decided to speak in
a frank, simple manner, hoping to make him less hostile. 'My request seems
almost too trivial to mention after these preliminaries.' I gave him what I
hoped was a disarming smile. 'It's simply this: I believe your guest may be an
old acquaintance of mine, and should like to meet her in order to settle the
point.' I was careful not to show too much interest.
He said nothing, but I could feel opposition behind his silence. Evidently
there had been a change in his attitude since the day when he had proposed to
introduce us at lunch. Now I felt pretty sure he would not agree to the
meeting.
Suddenly remembering the time, I looked at my watch. The five minutes had
almost gone. I had no intention of waiting until the guards came in, according
to orders, to throw me out, and began to make the opening moves of departure.
He came to the door with me, kept his hand on the knob, preventing me from
leaving. 'She's been unwell, and is nervous about meeting people. I shall have
to ask if she'll see you.' I was convinced he would not allow the meeting to
take place, and looked at my watch again. There was only one minute left. 'I
really must go now. I've taken up too much of your time already.' His
unexpected laughter took me by surprise; he must have known what was going on
in my head. His mood seemed to alter suddenly, all at once his manner was easy.
Once more I was momentarily aware of an obscure sense of inner contact with
him. He opened the door and gave an order to the men standing outside, who
saluted and marched away down the corridor, their boots thumping on the
polished floor. He turned to me then, and as if demonstrating his goodwill,
said: 'We can go to her now, if you like. But I'll have to prepare her first.'
He took me back into the crowded waiting-room, where everybody surged round,
eager to speak to him. He had a smile and a friendly word for those nearest,
raised his voice to apologize generally for keeping them waiting, begged them
all to be patient a few minutes longer, promised that everyone would be heard
in due course. In a tone audible all over the room, he demanded. 'Why is there
no music?' then spoke sharply to a subordinate. 'You know these people are my
guests. The least we can do is try to entertain them if they have to wait.' The
notes of a string quartet started to fill the room, and followed us out of it.
He led the way past more guards, strode quickly along winding corridors ahead
of me, ran up and down several flights of stairs. It was all I could do to keep
pace with him. He was in far better condition than I was, and seemed to enjoy
demonstrating the fact, looking back at me, laughing, showing off his fine
physique. I did not quite trust this sudden good humour. But I admired his
tough athlete's body, the wide shoulders and elegant, narrow waist. The
passages seemed never-ending. I was breathless, he had to wait for me finally,
standing at the top of yet another short staircase. The landing was in deep
shadow, I could just distinguish the rectangle of a single door, and realized
that the stairs led only to this one room.
He told me to stay where I was for a minute while he explained the situation to
the girl, adding, with a malicious grin: 'It'll give you time to cool off a
bit.' With his hand on the doorknob, he went on: 'You understand, don't you,
that it's entirely up to her to decide. There's nothing I can do if she prefers
not to see you.' He opened the door without knocking and vanished into the
room.
Left out there in the semi-darkness, I felt gloomy and irritated. He seemed to
have got the better of me by a trick. Nothing satisfactory to myself could come
of an interview arranged and introduced by him. Most probably it would not
materialize at all; either she would refuse to see me, or he would forbid her
to do so. In any case, I did not want to talk to her in his presence, when she
would be under his influence.
I listened, but could hear nothing through the soundproofed wall. After some
moments I went down the stairs and wandered round dark passages until I met a
servant who showed me the way out. My lucky period certainly seemed to be over.


FIVE

My window overlooked an empty landscape where nothing ever moved. No houses
were visible, only the debris of the collapsed wall, a bleak stretch of snow,
the fjord, the fir forest, the mountains. No colour, only monotonous shades of
grey from black to the ultimate dead white of the snow. The water lifeless in
its dead calm, the ranks of black trees marching everywhere in uniform gloom.
Suddenly there was a movement, a shout of red and blue in that silent grey
monotone. I seized my overcoat, struggled into it as I rushed to the door;
changed my mind and went back to the window, which was stuck fast. I managed to
heave it up, stepped out on to piles of rubble, then pulled it shut behind me
with the tips of my fingers. Slithering on the frozen grass, I ran down the
slope; it was the quickest way; and I had eluded the woman of the house, whom I
suspected of keeping watch on my movements. There was no one on the narrow path
skirting the fjord, but the person I was chasing could not be far off. The path
plunged into the forest. At once it got colder and darker under the trees,
which grew close together, their black branches meeting in dense entanglements
overhead, intertwining with the undergrowth lower down. Twenty invisible people
could have been near me, but I saw the ghostly grey coat flicker among the
firs, and occasionally caught a glimpse of its checked lining.
The wearer's head was uncovered: her bright hair shimmered like silver fire, an
ignis fatuus glimmering in the forest. She hurried on as fast as she could,
anxious to get out of the trees. She was nervous in the forest, which always
seemed full of menace. The crowding trees unnerved her, transformed themselves
into black walls, shutting her in. It was late, after sunset; she had come too
far and must hurry back. She looked about for the fjord, failed to see it, lost
her bearings, and at once became really frightened, terrified of being
overtaken by night in the dark forest. Fear was the climate she lived in; if
she had ever known kindness it would have been different. The trees seemed to
obstruct her with deliberate malice. All her life she had thought of herself as
a foredoomed victim, and now the forest had become the malign force that would
destroy her. In desperation she tried to run, but a hidden root tripped her,
she almost fell. Branches caught in her hair, tugged her back, lashed out
viciously when they were disentangled. The silver hairs torn from her head
glittered among black needles; they were the clues her pursuers would follow,
leading them to their victim. She escaped from the forest at length only to see
the fjord waiting for her. An evil effluence rose from the water, something
primitive, savage, demanding victims, hungry for a human victim.
For a second she stood still, appalled by the absolute silence and loneliness
all around. A new ferocity pervaded the landscape now that night was
approaching. She saw the massed armies of forest trees encamped on all sides,
the mountain wall above bristling with trees like guns. Below, the fjord was an
impossible icy volcano erupting the baleful fire of the swallowed sun.
In the deepening dusk every horror could be expected. She was afraid to look,
tried not to see the spectral shapes rising from the water, but felt them come
gliding towards her and fled in panic. One overtook her, wound her in soft,
clammy, adhesive bands like ectoplasm. Wildly choking a scream, she fought
herself free, raced on blindly, frantic and gasping. Her brain was locked in
nightmare, she did not think. The last light fading, she stumbled against
unseen rocks, bruising knees and elbows. Thorns lacerated her hands, scratched
her face. Her flying leaps shattered the thin ice at the fjord's edge and she
was deluged in freezing water. Each breath was painful, a sharp knife
repeatedly stabbing her chest. She dared not stop or slacken speed for an
instant, terrified by the loud thud of pursuing steps close behind her, not
recognizing her own agonized heartbeats. Suddenly she slipped on the edge of a
snowdrift, could not stop herself, fell face down in a deep snow-grave. There
was snow in her mouth, she was done for, finished, she would never get up
again, could not run any further. Cruelly straining muscles relentlessly forced
her up, she had to struggle on, pulled by the irresistible magnet of doom.
Systematic bullying when she was most vulnerable had distorted the structure of
her personality, made a victim of her, to be destroyed, either by things or by
human beings, people or fjords and forests; it made no difference, in any case
she could not escape. The irreparable damage inflicted had long ago rendered
her fate inevitable.
A pitch black mass of rock loomed ahead, a hill, a mountain, an unlighted
fortress, buttressed by regiments of black firs. Her weak hands were shaking
too much to manipulate a door, but the waiting forces of doom dragged her
inside.
Stretched out on her bed, she could feel the hostile, alien, freezing dark
pressed to the wall like the ear of a listening enemy. In the utter silence and
solitude, she lay watching the mirror, waiting for her fate to arrive. It would
not be long now. She knew that something fearful was going to happen in the
sound-proof room, where nobody could or would come to her rescue. The room was
antagonistic as it always had been. She was aware of the walls refusing
protection, of the frigid hostility in the air. There was nothing she could do,
no one to whom she could appeal. Abandoned, helpless, she could only wait for
the end.
A woman came in without knocking and stood in the doorway, handsome,
forbidding, dressed all in black, tall and menacing as a tree, followed by
other indistinct shapes, which kept to the shadows behind her. The girl at once
recognized her executioner, whose enmity she had always felt without
understanding it, too innocent or too preoccupied with her own dream world to
guess the obvious cause. Now, cold bright pitiless eyes swam in the glassy
depths of the mirror, darted towards their victim. Her eyes were widely dilated
and black with dread, two deep pits of terror, of intuitive nightmare
foreknowledge. Then a sense of fatality overcame her; she experienced a
regression, became a submissive, terrorized child, cowed by persistent ill-
treatment. Intimidated, obedient to the woman's commanding voice, she got up
and with faltering steps left the platform, her white face blank as paper. When
her arms were seized she cried out, struggled feebly. A hand was clamped over
her mouth. Several figures towered above her. She was gripped from all sides,
roughly handled, hustled out of the room, her hands tied behind her back.
Under the trees it got darker and darker, I kept losing sight of the path. In
the end I lost it entirely and came out at a different place. I was close to
the wall. It was impressive, intact, no break in it anywhere; I saw the black
shapes of sentries posted along the top. Two of them were approaching each
other and would cross quite near me. I stood still in the shadow of the black
trees where I should not be seen. Their steps were loud, the hard frost
magnified every sound. They met, stamped their feet, exchanged passwords,
separated again.
I walked on when the footsteps grew fainter. I had a curious feeling that I was
living on several planes simultaneously; the overlapping of these planes was
confusing. Huge rounded boulders as big as houses, resembling the heads of
decapitated giants, were lying near, where they had fallen long ago from the
mountainside. Suddenly I heard voices, looked everywhere, but could see no one.
The sound seemed to come from among the boulders, so I went to investigate. A
light flowered yellow in the blue dusk: I was looking at a cottage, not a mass
of rock. People were talking inside it.
I heard yells, crashes, the frightened neighing of horses, all the noises of
battle. Arrows flew in clouds. War clubs thumped. There was loud clashing of
steel. Strangely dressed men came at the wall in waves, swarming up it, using
their feet as well as their hands, holding cutlasses in their teeth. Agile as
gorillas, they came in their thousands; however many were thrown back, a new
wave always came on. Finally all the defenders of the wall were exterminated,
the second line defences forced back. Invaders already inside opened the gates,
and the rest burst in like a tidal wave. People barricaded themselves in their
houses. In the town there was utter chaos. Hand to hand fighting in the narrow
streets; savage meaningless cries like the cries of wild animals resounding
between the walls. The strangers raced through the town like madmen, pouring
wine down their throats, slaughtering all they met, every man, woman, child,
animal. The wine streamed down their faces mingled with sweat and blood so that
they looked like demons. A little snow fell: this seemed to excite them to
frenzy, they laughed insanely, tried to catch the falling flakes in their
mouths. The horsemen carried long lances with pennants or feathers attached.
Hacked-off heads were impaled on these lances, sometimes infants or dogs. Huge
fires blazed everywhere, it was as bright as day. The air was full of the reek
of burning, of charred wood and old dust. As people were smoked out of their
homes they were massacred by the enemy. Many preferred to die in the flames.
I had no weapon, and searched for something with which to defend myself. I was
in a street where dead horses had been piled up to form a barricade, among them
a man who had been killed with his mount. He had not had time even to draw his
sword, which was still in the scabbard, engraved with intricate patterns, a
beautiful piece of work. I tugged at the projecting hilt, but in falling the
blade had jammed and I could not move it. The dead beasts had been heaped up in
such frantic haste that my persistent efforts were shaking the whole
construction; carcasses worked loose, rolled down, forming a breech. Before I
could repair the damage, a troop of horsemen galloped along the street with a
fearful clattering din, waving their lances, yelling their senseless cries. I
threw myself flat on the ground, hoping they had not seen me, expecting the
worst. As they came up, one of them jabbed his long lance ahead of him into the
dead rider, dislodging the body so violently that it fell on top of me,
probably saving my life. I kept perfectly still while the whole troop went
careering past, rolling their bloodshot, demented, animalic eyes.
When they had gone, I pushed the corpse aside and got up to go and search for
the girl. I had not much hope of finding her; I knew the fate of girls in
sacked towns. The sword was loose now, I pulled it out easily. I had never used
such a weapon and tried slashing at some of the bodies I passed. The thing was
heavy and hard to handle, but I discovered the balance and began to get the
feel of it as I walked, thus gaining some much-needed confidence. As it
happened, I was not attacked. Most of the fighting was going on in the lower
streets, round the harbour forts, which appeared to be holding out. When I saw
anyone I took cover, and in the general con- fusion escaped observation. The
High House was almost burnt out already, only the shell still standing. Smoke
and flames spouted towards the sky, the whole interior was incandescent. I
approached as close as I could, but was driven back by the smoke and the
intense heat. It was quite impossible to get inside. In any case, nobody could
have survived in such an inferno. My face was scorched, sparks were smouldering
in my hair, I crushed them out with my hands.
I came upon her by chance, not far away, lying face down on the stones. A
little blood had trickled out of her mouth. Her neck had an unnatural twist; a
living girl could not have turned her head at that angle: the neck was broken.
She had been dragged by the hair, hands which had twisted it into a sort of
rope had dulled its silvery brightness. On her back blood was still fresh in
places, wet and bright red; in other places it had caked black on the white
flesh. I looked particularly at one arm, on which the circular marks of teeth
stood out clearly. The bones of the forearm were broken, the sharp pointed ends
of bone projected at the wrist through the torn tissue. I felt I had been
defrauded: I alone should have done the breaking with tender love; I was the
only person entitled to inflict wounds. I leaned forward and touched her cold
skin.
I went to look in at the cottage window, taking care not to go near enough to
be seen from inside. A lot of people were crowded into a small smoky room,
firelight flickering red on their faces, reminding me of a medieval picture of
hell. At first I could not make out any words; they were all talking at once. I
recognized one woman, unusually tall, handsome in a forbidding way; I had seen
her at the High House. Now she was with a man she called father who sat just
inside the window. Because he was so close to me, his was the first voice I
understood. He was relating the legend of the fjord, how every year at the
winter solstice a beautiful girl had to be sacrificed to the dragon that lived
in its depths. The other voices gradually became silent when he began
describing the rite itself. 'We untie her as soon as we get her up there on the
rock. She must struggle a bit, otherwise the dragon might think we'd palmed off
a dead girl on him. The water foams down below. The monster's great scaly coils
appear. Then we hurl her down. The whole fjord becomes a maelstrom, blood and
foam flying in all directions.'
A lively discussion of the sacrifice followed, different people speaking in
turn. They might have been talking about a football match between their team
and a rival town. Somebody said: 'We haven't so many good-looking girls to
spare. Why should we give one of them to the dragon? Why not sacrifice a
stranger, some foreign girl who means nothing to any of us?' The tone of voice
suggested that the speaker referred to a special person, whose identity was
known to all present. The father started raising objections, but was silenced
by his daughter, who called out her agreement, launching into a vicious tirade
of which I only caught isolated phrases. 'Pale girls who look as pure as if
they were made of glass . . . smash them to smithereens. . . . And I will smash
this one. . . .' The end was shouted. 'I'll hurl her down off the rock myself,
if none of you have the guts to do it!'
I walked away in disgust. These people were worse than savages. My hands and
face were numb, I felt half frozen, and could not think why I had stood there
so long listening to their preposterous rigmarole. I had a vague feeling that
something was wrong with me, though I could not decide what it was. For a
moment this was disturbing; then I forgot it. A small, cold, bright moon shone
high in the sky, showed the landscape distinctly. I recognized the fjord but
not the scene. Tall perpendicular rocks rose straight out of the water,
supporting a flat horizontal rock like a high-diving platform. Some people
appeared, dragging the girl between them, her hands tied. As she passed me, I
caught a glimpse of her pitiful white face of a child-victim, terrified and
betrayed. I sprang forward, tried to reach her, to cut her bonds. Somebody went
for me. I threw him off, tried again to get near her, she was dragged away. I
rushed after the group, shouting: 'Murderers!' Before I could overtake them,
they were hauling her up the rock.
I was close to her on the platform high above the fjord. We were alone there,
although a mixture of vague sounds behind me indicated the presence of numerous
on-lookers. They did not concern me. I was completely concentrated on the
trembling figure, half kneeling, half crouching, at the extremity of the rock,
overhanging the dark water. Her hair glittered as if with diamond dust under
the moon. She was not looking at me, but I could see her face, which was always
pale, but now drained of colour right to the bone. I observed her extreme
slenderness, felt I could enclose the whole of her with my two hands, even the
rib-cage containing her heart. Her skin was like white satin, shadowless in the
brilliant moonlight. The circular marks the cords had left on her wrists would
have been red in daylight, but now looked black. I could imagine how it would
feel to take hold of her wrists and to snap the fragile bones with my hands.
Leaning forward, I touched her cold skin, the shallow hollow in her thigh. Snow
had fallen between her breasts.
Armed men came up, pushed me back, seized her by her frail shoulders. Big tears
fell from her eyes like icicles, like diamonds, but I was unmoved. They did not
seem to me like real tears. She herself did not seem quite real. She was pale
and almost transparent, the victim I used for my own enjoyment in dreams.
People behind me muttered, impatient at the delay. The men did not wait any
longer but hurled her down, her last pathetic scream trailing after her. The
night exploded then like a paper bag. Huge jets of water sprang up; waves
dashing wildly against the rocks burst in cascades of spray. I hardly noticed
the freezing showerbath, but peered over the edge of the platform, and saw a
circle of scaly coils emerge from the seething water, in which something white
struggled frantically for an instant before the crunch of armour-plated jaws.
I was in a hurry to get back to my lodging. My feet and fingers were numb, my
face stiff, my head starting to ache with the cold. As soon as I had thawed out
a little in my warm room, I began to write. My main topic, of course, was the
Indris, but I still kept up the pretence I had started by writing down anything
that seemed of interest about the town. I did not think the security people
would bother to read my notes, although they could easily do so while I was out
of the room. The childishly simple form of scrambling I used, mixing up
sentences about the lemurs with others on local affairs, would at least defeat
the woman of the house, who pried into everything.
I derived great satisfaction from describing the gentle mysterious singing
creatures, and seemed to grow more deeply involved with them as I wrote. With
their enchanting other- world voices, their gay, affectionate, innocent ways,
they had become for me symbols of life as it could be on earth, if man's
destructiveness, violence and cruelty were eliminated. I enjoyed writing as a
rule, the sentences came to me without effort, as if they formed in my head of
their own accord. But now it was quite different, I could not find the right
words: I knew I was not expressing myself lucidly, or remembering accurately,
and after some minutes put down my pen. Immediately I saw a mental picture of
many people crowded into a smoky room, and felt I ought to inform the warden of
what I had overheard. At the same time, there was a curious unreality about the
memory of that scene, as if I could have dreamt it. And when it occurred to me
that the girl might be in real danger I did not quite believe this. I got up,
all the same, to go to the telephone. Then, restrained by the peculiar
uncertainty as to what was real more than the thought of the woman who would be
listening to every word, I decided not to ring up until I got to the café.
My sense of unreality became overwhelming as I left the house. A strong
colourless light was making everything outside as clear as day, though I was
quite unable to see where it came from. My amazement increased when I observed
that this extraordinary light revealed details not normally visible to the
naked eye. It was snowing slightly, and the complex structure of each
individual snowflake appeared in crystalline clearness, the delicate starlike,
flowerlike forms perfectly distinct and as bright as jewels. I looked round for
the familiar ruins, but they were no longer there. I was used to the sight of
destruction, but this was different. Nothing whatever was left of the ruined
town; its structures had disintegrated, the remains were flattened, spread as
though a giant steam roller had passed over them. The one or two vertical
fragments seemed to have been left intentionally, with the deliberate object of
emphasizing the general levelling. With a dreamlike feeling, I walked on,
seeing no one, either alive or dead. The air was full of a sweetish smell, not
unpleasant, which I could smell on my own hands and clothes, and presumed had
been left by some gas. The absence of fires surprised me; nothing seemed to be
burning, I saw no smoke. I only now noticed thin trickles of a white milky
fluid moving among the debris, collecting in pools here and there. These white
pools continually widened as the liquid eroded their edges, eating away
whatever came in contact with it; it was only a question of time before the
entire mass of wreckage would be disposed of in this way. I stood still for a
moment to watch the process, fascinated by such a practical, thorough method of
clearance.
I remembered that I had to find the girl, searched for her desperately through
the endless rubble. I thought I saw her a long way off in the distance,
shouted, ran; she changed, disappeared. Like a mirage I saw her still further
away; then she vanished again. A girl's arm protruded from a heap of detritus;
I took hold of the wrist, pulled gently; it came away in my hand. All at once I
heard sounds and movements behind me, quickly swung round, caught sight of
living objects which moved with a gliding motion, made warbling noises. Their
shapes were queer, only partially human, reminding me of mutants in science
fiction stories. They took no notice of me, ignored my existence completely,
and I hurried on without going any closer.
When I came to a place where bodies were lying about, I stopped to examine them
in case one was hers. I went up to the nearest corpse and looked at it
carefully. It was not recognizable, the skeleton and what was left of the flesh
had become phosphorescent. To look at the others would only be wasting time, so
I left them alone.


SIX

The owner of the house heard me pass her door, opened it, peered out frowning.
I pretended not to have seen her and hurried on, but the outer door would not
move, there was some obstruction. I pushed hard, scattering the snow piled
against it, and letting in icy wind that rattled something behind me. There was
an angry shout, 'Mind what you're doing!' which I ignored.
Outside I was astonished by the quantity of snow that had fallen. A different
town, white and spectral, had replaced the old one. The few feeble lights
showed how the shapes of the ruins were altered by their thick white covering,
the details of destruction obscured, all outlines muffled and blurred. The
effect of the heavy snowfall was to deprive structures of solidity and precise
location: my old impression revived of a scene made of nylon with nothing
behind. Only a few snow- flakes were in the air at first; then a white flurry
passed me, driven along parallel to the ground by the strong wind. I lowered my
head against this freezing wind, and saw the small grains of snow, dry and
frozen, swirling round my legs. The flurries thickened, became incessant,
filling the air; I could not see where I was. I got only intermittent glimpses
of my surroundings, which seemed vaguely familiar, and yet distorted, unreal.
My ideas were confused. In a peculiar way, the unreality of the outer world
appeared to be an extension of my own disturbed state of mind.
Collecting my thoughts with an effort, I remembered that the girl was in danger
and must be warned. I gave up trying to find the café, and decided to go
straight to the warden. I could just make out the fortlike mass of his home
looming over the town.
Except for the main square, the streets were always deserted after dark, so I
was amazed to see quite a number of figures climbing the steep hill in front of
me. Next moment I remembered hearing talk, without paying attention, of some
public dinner or celebration at the High House, which evidently was being held
tonight. I reached the entrance only a few steps behind the nearest group of
people, and was glad they were there; without them, I should not have been sure
this was the right place, the snow made everything look so different. Two
hillocks, one on each side, might have been the batteries; but there were other
white mounds I could not account for. A cluster of long pointed icicles, sharp
as swords, clung to a lantern over the huge main door, glistening ferociously
in the dim light. As those ahead of me were admitted, I stepped forward and
went inside with them. The guards would most likely have let me in if I had
been alone, but this seemed the easiest way.
Nobody took the least notice of me. I must have been recognized, but received
no sign of recognition from anyone, felt increasingly derealized, as familiar
faces came up and passed me without a glance. The gloomy great place was
already crowded, the group I had come in with must have been one of the last.
If this was a celebration, it was singularly subdued. All the faces were dour
as usual; there was no laughing and little talking. Such conversation as went
on took place in tones too low to be overheard.
Ceasing to notice the people, I considered how I was to reach the girl. The
warden had taken me to the door of her room, but I knew I would never be able
to find it again without a guide. Somebody would have to help me. Wondering who
would be the best person to approach, I wandered from room to room, presently
found myself in a huge vaulted hall, where trestle tables had been set up, with
jugs and bottles of wine and spirits placed at intervals between vast platters
of meat and bread. Standing in a dark corner where I would not be seen, I
watched the servants bringing in more plates of food and arranging them on the
tables. In spite of an almost feverish anxiety over the girl, instead of
attempting to find her, I stood there doing nothing at all; became aware of an
odd sort of fragmentation of my ideas.
Hundreds of torches flared, lighting the great hall, a banquet had been
arranged to celebrate victory. I went first with one of my aides to look over
the prisoners. It was the commander's traditional privilege, a routine. The
women were herded together behind a barrier. They had already retreated as far
from everyone as they could, but when they saw us coming contrived to move back
further still, pressing against the wall. They did not attract me. I could not
tell one from another; suffering had given them all the same features. In other
parts of the hall there was much noise, but here only silence; no pleadings, no
curses, no lamentations; just staring eyes, the red flicker of torchlight on
naked limbs, breasts.
Torches were fixed like bundles of rockets to the enormous pillars supporting
the high arched roof. Leaning against one of these pillars a young girl stood a
little apart, unclothed except by her shining hair. The death of hope had
tranquilized her white face. She was scarcely more than a child, did not see
us; her eyes were looking far inward at dreams. Arms like peeled wands, silvery
streaming hair ... a young moon among clouds ... I wanted to stay and watch
her. But they came to escort me to the presence.
His splendid gold seat was carved with the faces and exploits of heroes, his
ancestors. His magnificent cloak, lined with sable and gold embroidered, draped
his knees in stiff statuesque folds. Sparks dripped from the torches and warmed
the cold white of his long, thin, restless hands. A blue flash from his eyes: a
matching blue flash from a tremendous jewel worn on his hand. I did not know
the name of this stone. Neither his hands nor his eyes were ever at rest, there
was a constant bombardment of blue. He would not let me move to a different
place, kept me standing beside him. Because I had led the victorious army, he
gave me a glittering order I did not want: I had too many already. I told him I
only wanted the girl. A gasp went up. The people round him waited to see me
struck down. I was indifferent. I had lived half my life, seen as much as I
wanted. I was sick of war, sick of serving this difficult, dangerous master who
loved war and killing and nothing else. There was a kind of insanity in his
war-making. Conquest was not enough. He wanted a war of extermination, all
enemies slaughtered without exception, nobody left alive. He wanted to kill me.
But, though he could not live without war, he was unable to plan a campaign,
take a city; I had to do that. So he could not kill me. He wanted my war skills
and he wanted me dead. Now he gave me a deadly glance, kept me at his side;
but, at the same time, beckoned closer those standing around him. They formed a
close sychophantic circle, the only gap was the point where I stood. A small
man slipped in, crept under my arm, lifted a long-nosed face like a vicious dog
ready to bite, cringing before his master, snarling at me. Now the circle was
closed. But I could still watch the ring flashing blue, the gesticulations of
the unquiet hands, their long thin white fingers and long pointed nails. The
fingers curved inwards in a strange way, like a strangler's, the blue stone was
anchored by the curved bone. Commands were given, too low for me to hear.
Earlier, he had praised my skill and courage extravagantly, promised me great
rewards, I was his guest of honour. I knew him well, could well imagine what
sort of reward he planned for me now. I had already prepared my face.
Six guards brought her to him, bundled up in a soldier's cloak. These men had
been taught a trick of grasping that left no bruises. I had never learnt it,
did not see now how it was done. There was a moment's pause. I wondered if,
after all, generosity might be shown ... in the circumstances, it seemed just
possible.
Then I saw his hand move towards her, the curved predatory fingers, the blazing
blue. She gave a small choked cry as the huge ring tore through her hair: it
was the one time I heard her voice. I heard too the faint clank of the metal
rings round her wrists and ankles when she fell with violence across his knees.
I stood motionless, looking on with an expressionless face. That cold, hard,
mad, murderous man; her soft young girl's body and dreaming eyes ... a pity,
sad. . . .
I had decided to approach one of the servants who were still busy round the
long tables. I was watching a scared-looking peasant girl, one of the youngest
of them, slow, clumsy and obviously new to the work. She seemed frightened,
downtrodden, the others teased her, slapped her, jeered, called her half-
witted. She was tearful, kept making mistakes, I saw her drop things several
times. Her sight could have been defective I went and stood in a doorway she
had to pass, grabbed her and dragged her through, my hand over her mouth.
Luckily the passage beyond was empty. While I was saying I would not harm her,
only wanted her help, she looked at me in horror, her red eyes filling with
tears; blinked, trembled, seemed too stupid to understand. There was no time,
in a moment people would come looking for her, but she would not speak. I spoke
to her kindly; argued with her; shook her; showed her a wad of notes.
Absolutely no response, no reaction. Increasing the amount of money, I held it
under her nose, told her: 'Here's your chance to get away from people who treat
you badly. With this you won't have to work again for a long time.' Finally she
saw the point, agreed to take me to the room.
We started off, but she was slow and kept hesitating, so that I began to wonder
whether she really knew the way. My nerves were on edge, I wanted to hit her,
it was hard to control myself. I was afraid of being too late. I said I had to
speak to the warden, which would be impossible once the party had started. It
was a relief to hear that he never appeared during the early part of the
evening, but only when the eating and drinking were over, in about two hours'
time. At last I recognized the final steep staircase. She pointed to the top,
clutched the money I was holding ready for her, bolted back the way we had
come.
I went up and opened the solitary door. The sound-proof room was in darkness,
but a little of the faint light from the landing came in behind me. I saw the
girl lying on the bed, fully dressed, with a book beside her; she had fallen
asleep while reading. I spoke her name softly. She started up, her hair
glinting. 'Who's that?' There was fear in her voice. I moved, let the dim light
touch my face; she knew me at once, said: 'What are you doing here?' I said:
'You're in danger; I've come to take you away.' 'Why should I go with you?' She
sounded astonished. 'There's no difference...' We both heard a sound at the
same moment; footsteps were starting to mount the stairs. I stepped back,
froze, held my breath. The feeble light outside the door was extinguished. I
stood in black shadow, I was pretty safe; unless she gave me away.
The man's ungentle hands gripped her. 'Put on your outdoor things quickly.
We're leaving at once.' His voice was low and peremptory. 'Leaving?' She
stared, saw him as a blacker shadow against the black, her cold lips murmuring:
'Why?' 'Don't talk. Do as I tell you.' Obediently she stood up, the draught
from the door made her shiver. 'How am I supposed to find anything in the dark?
Can't we have a light?' 'No. Somebody might see.' He flashed a torch briefly,
saw her pick up a comb and start pulling it through her hair, snatched it away
from her. 'Leave that! Get your coat on--hurry!' The irritable impatience
radiating from him made her movements slower, more awkward. Feeling about the
dark room, she found her coat but could not find the way into it; she held it
the wrong way round. He seized it angrily, turned it, forced her arms through
the sleeves. 'And now come on! Don't make a sound. Nobody must know we've
gone.' 'Where are we going? Why do we have to go at this time of night?' She
expected no answer, doubted whether she heard correctly when he muttered, 'It's
the one chance,' adding something about the approaching ice. He grasped her arm
then, pulled her across the landing and on to the stairs. The beam of the
torch, intermittently stabbing pitch blackness, showed his looming repressive
shadow, which she followed as if sleepwalking through all the ramifications of
the huge building, out into the icy snowfilled night.
Although snow was falling heavily, there was none on the black car; it had just
been cleared away: yet no one had passed them, nobody was in sight. She
shivered as she got in, sat in silence while he quickly inspected the chains.
Yellow oblongs stained the pure white in front of the windows. In the air, the
snow was transformed into showering gold as it passed the lights. A confused
noise from the dining hall, voices, clattering plates, drowned the noise of the
car starting up, and impelled her to ask: 'What about all those people who are
expecting you? Aren't you going to see them?'
Already in a state of irritable nervous tension, he was exasperated by the
question, lifted one hand from the wheel in a threatening gesture. 'I told you
not to talk!' His voice was frightening, his eyes flashed in the dark interior
of the car. She moved fast to avoid the blow, but could not get out of reach,
crouched down, shielding herself with her raised arm, made no sound when the
glancing blow struck her shoulder and crushed her against the door; afterwards
huddled there in silence, shrinking away from his silent rage.
Snow-muffled silence outside; silence filling the car. He drove without lights,
his eyes like cats' eyes, able to see through the snowy darkness. A ghost-car,
invisible, silent, fled from the ruined town. The ancient snow-covered
fortifications fell back and vanished in snow, the broken wall vanished behind.
In front loomed the black living wall of the forest, ghostly whiteness fuming
along its crest like spray blown back from the crest of a breaking wave. She
waited for the black mass to come crashing down on them, but there was no
crash, only the silence of snow and forest outside, and in the car, his
silence, her apprehension. He never spoke, never looked at her, handled the
powerful car recklessly on the rough frozen track, hurling it at speed over all
obstacles, as if by the force of his will. The violent lurching of the car
threw her about; she was not heavy enough to keep in her seat. Thrown against
him, forced to touch his coat, she winced away as though the material burned.
He seemed unaware. She felt forgotten, forsaken.
It was incomprehensible to her, this extraordinary flight that went on and on.
The forest went on for ever. The silence went on and on. The snow stopped, but
the cold went on and even increased, as if some icy exudation from the black
trees congealed beneath them. Hour after hour passed before a little reluctant
daylight filtered down through the roof of branches, revealing nothing but
gloomy masses of firs, dead and living trees tangled together, a dead bird
often caught in the branches, as if the tree had caught it deliberately. She
shuddered, identifying herself, as a victim, with the dead bird. It was she who
had been snared by nets of black branches. Armies of trees surrounded her on
all sides, marching to infinity in all directions. Snow flew past the window
again, waving white flags. She was the one who long ago had surrendered. She
understood nothing of what was happening. The car leapt in the air, she was
flung painfully on to her bruised shoulder, tried ineffectually to shield it
with the other hand.
The man drove the car brutally throughout the short day. It seemed to her that
she had never known anything but this terrifying drive in the feeble half-
light; the silence, the cold, the snow, the arrogant figure beside her. His
cold statue's eyes were the eyes of a Mercury, ice-eyes, mesmeric and menacing.
She wished for hatred. It would have been easier. The trees receded a little, a
little more sky appeared, bringing the last gleams of the fading light.
Suddenly, she was astonished to see two log huts, a gate between, blocking the
road. Unless the gate was opened they could not pass. She watched it racing
towards them, reinforced with barbed wire and metal. The car burst through with
a tremendous shattering smash, a great rending and tearing, a frantic metallic
screeching. Broken glass showered her, she ducked instinctively as a long,
sharp, pointed sliver sliced the air just over her head, and the car rocked
sickeningly on two wheels before turning over. At the last moment then, by some
miracle of skill, or strength, or sheer will power, the driver brought it back
on to its axis again, and drove on as if nothing had happened.
Shouts exploded behind them. A few shots popped ineffectively and fell short.
She glanced back and saw uniforms running; then the small commotion was over,
cut off by black trees. The road improved on this side of the frontier, the car
travelled faster, more smoothly. She shifted her position, leaning away from
the stream of ice-vapour entering through the smashed window, shook bits of
broken glass off her lap. There was blood on her wrists, both hands were cut
and bleeding; she looked at them in remote surprise.
I raced down stairs and passages. In sight of the main door I hid in the
shadows, watched the men guarding it. Sounds of the party, now growing more
animated, came from the dining hall, where drinking was evidently in full
swing. Someone shouted to the guards out in the cold corridor. The men I was
watching put their heads together, then left their post, passed close to me as
they went to join the rest. Unnoticed by anyone, I slipped out through the door
they were supposed to be guarding.
It was snowing hard. I could barely distinguish the nearest ruins, white
stationary shadows beyond the moving fabric of falling white. Snowflakes turned
yellow like swarms of bees round the lighted windows. A wide expanse of snow
lay in front of me, a hollow marking the place where the warden's black car had
stood. I realized that various white mounds must be other cars, belonging,
presumably, to his household, and waded towards them through the deep snow. I
tried the door of the first one, found it unlocked. The whole vehicle was
buried in snow, which had drifted deep against wheels and windscreen. Snow fell
all over me when I opened the door, filled my sleeve as I tried to clean the
glass. I thought the starter would never work, but at last the car began to
move slowly forward. I revved the engine just enough to keep the tyres
gripping, and followed the warden's hardly visible tracks, which were rapidly
being obliterated by fresh snow. Outside the encircling wall they practically
vanished. I lost them altogether at the edge of the forest, blindly drove into
a tree, scraping off the bark. The car stopped and refused to move. The wheels
just spun round, uselessly churning the snow. As I got out, a mass of snow fell
on me from the branches above. In two seconds my clothes were caked solid with
driving snow. I tore down fir branches, threw them under the wheels, got back
into the car and re-started. It was no good; the tyres would not grip, still
went on spinning and hissing. I was sliding sideways, I pulled on the brake,
jumped straight into a snowdrift, sank up to my armpits. The snow kept
collapsing on me as I moved, slipped inside my collar, my shirt, I felt snow in
my navel; to struggle out was an exhausting business. After breaking off more
branches and piling them under the car without the least effect, I knew I was
beaten and would have to give up. Weather conditions were quite impossible.
Somehow or other I got the car going, and crawled back to the town. It was the
only thing to do in the circumstances.
I started skidding again just as I reached the wall, lost control this time.
Suddenly I saw the front wheels crumbling the edge of a deep bomb-crater; one
more second, and I would be over; the drop was of many feet. I stood on the
foot brake, the car spun right round, executed a complete circle before I
jumped out and it nose dived, vanishing under the snow.
I was freezing, very tired, shivering so much I could hardly walk. Luckily my
lodging was not far off. I slithered and staggered back there, crouched over
the stove just as I was, plastered in frozen snow, my teeth chattering. The
shivering was so violent I could not unfasten my coat, only succeeded in
dragging it off by slow stages. In the same laborious fashion, by prolonged
painful effort, I finally got rid of the rest of my freezing clothes, struggled
into a dressing gown. It was then that I saw the cable and ripped open the
envelope.
My informant reported the crisis due in the next few days. All air and sea
services had ceased operating, but arrangements had been made to pick me up by
helicopter in the morning. Still holding the flimsy paper, I crawled into bed,
went on shivering under piles of blankets. The warden must have received the
news earlier in the day. He had fled to save himself, abandoning his people to
their fate. Of course such conduct was highly reprehensible, scandalous: but I
did not condemn him. I did not think I would have acted differently in his
place. Nothing he could have done would have saved the country. If he had
revealed the critical situation a panic would have resulted, the roads would
have been jammed, nobody would have escaped. In any case, judging by what I had
just experienced, his chance of reaching the frontier was extremely slim.


SEVEN

The aircraft deposited me at a distant port just before the ship sailed. I was
suffering from some kind of fever, shivering, aching, apathetic. I sat at the
back of the car rushing me to the docks, did not even look out, went on board
in a daze. The ship was already moving when I crossed the deck, meaning to go
straight to my cabin. But now the scene caught my eye, and it gave me a shock;
I stopped and stood staring. A sunlit harbour was sliding past me, a busy town;
I saw wide streets, well-dressed people, modern buildings, cars, yachts on the
blue water. No snow; no ruins; no armed guards. It was a miracle, a flashback
to something dreamed. Then another shock, the sensation of a violent awakening,
as it dawned on me that this was the reality, and those other things the dream.
All of a sudden the life I had lately been living appeared unreal: it simply
was not credible any longer. I felt a huge relief, it was like emerging into
sunshine from a long cold black tunnel. I wanted to forget what had just been
happening, to forget the girl and the senseless, frustrating pursuit I had been
engaged in, and think only about the future.
Later, when the fever left me, my feelings remained unchanged. Thankful to have
escaped from the past, I decided to go to the Indris; to make that tropical
island my home, and the lemurs themselves my life work. I would devote the rest
of my time to studying them, writing their history, recording their strange
songs. No one else had done it, as far as I knew. It seemed a satisfactory
project, a worthwhile aim.
From the shop on board I bought a big notebook and a stock of ball-point pens.
I was ready to plan my work. But I could not concentrate. After all, I had not
escaped the past. My thoughts kept wandering back to the girl; incredible that
I should have wished to forget her. Such a forgetting would have been
monstrous, impossible. She was like a part of me, I could not live without her.
But now I wanted to go to the Indris, so there was a conflict. She prevented
me, holding me back with thin arms.
I tried to stop thinking about her, to fix my mind on those innocent gentle
creatures, their sweet, eerie singing. But she persistently distracted me with
thoughts that were less than innocent. Her face haunted me: the sweep of her
long lashes, her timid enchanting smile; and then a change of expression I
could produce at will, a sudden shift, a bruised look, a quick change to
terror, to tears. The strength of the temptation alarmed me. The black
descending arm of the executioner; my hands seizing her wrists. ... I was
afraid the dream might turn out to be real. . . . Something in her demanded
victimization and terror, so she corrupted my dreams, led me into dark places I
had no wish to explore. It was no longer clear to me which of us was the
victim. Perhaps we were victims of one another.
I was desperately worried when I thought of the situation I had left behind. I
walked round and round the decks, wondering what had happened, whether the
warden had got away, whether she had been with him. No news was received on
board ship. I could only wait, in great anxiety and impatience, to reach a port
where I could go ashore and get some information. At last the day came. The
steward had pressed my suit.
He brought it back with a buttonhole, a red carnation he had got hold of
somehow. Its strong colour looked well against the light grey material.
Just as I was ready to leave my cabin, there was a peremptory bang on the door,
and a plain-clothes policeman came in without waiting for me to answer. He did
not take off his hat, but opened his jacket to show the official badge, the
pistol in its armpit holster. I gave him my passport. He flipped over the pages
contemptuously, looked me up and down in an insolent way, stared hard and with
particular disapproval at the red carnation. Everything about my appearance
obviously confirmed the low opinion he had already formed. I asked what he
wanted with me, received no answer but an insulting silence: I would not ask
again. He produced a pair of handcuffs, dangled them in front of me. I said
nothing. When he tired of the jingling, he put them away, observing that, out
of respect for my country, handcuffs would not be used. I was to be allowed to
walk off the ship with him. But I had better not play any games.
The sun shone, everybody was going ashore. In the crowd I kept close beside
him, as agreed. I was not worried. Such things happened. I gathered that I was
wanted for interrogation, and wondered what questions I would be asked, and how
they had got hold of my name. Uniformed police were waiting for us in a side
street just off the quay. They ordered me into an armoured car with black glass
in the windows. After a short drive, we stopped at a large municipal building
in a quiet square. Birds were singing. I noted the sound specially after the
days at sea.
The few passers-by paid no attention to us. But a girl standing at the corner a
few yards away took some interest, judging by her frequent glances in my
direction. I saw that she was selling spring flowers, jonquils, dwarf irises,
wild tulips, and among them a bunch of red carnations, like the one I was
wearing. Then armed figures fell in round me, marched me into the building and
down a long corridor. 'Get a move on.' A powerful hand gripped my elbow, pushed
me up some steps. Double doors at the top opened into a hall where people sat
in tiers as at a theatre, a magistrate enthroned facing them. 'In you go!'
Various hard hands pulled and shoved me into a sort of pew. 'Halt!' Feet
stamped smartly to right and left, and I looked round, feeling detached from
the situation. A high ceiling, closed windows, no sun, no singing birds, on
each side of me men with guns, everywhere staring faces. People whispered or
cleared their throats. The jury looked tired, or bored. Somebody read out my
name and particulars, all quite correct. I confirmed them and took the oath.
The case was that a girl had vanished, supposed kidnapped, possibly murdered. A
well-known person had been suspected and questioned, and had accused someone
else who could not be found. The girl's name was mentioned; I was asked if I
knew her. I replied that I had known her for several years. 'You were intimate
with her?' 'We were old friends.' There was laughter; somebody asked: 'What was
your relationship with her?' 'I've told you; we were old friends.' More
laughter, silenced by an official. 'You expect us to believe that you changed
your plans all at once, dropped everything you were doing, in order to follow a
friend to a foreign country?' They seemed to know all about me. I said: 'That
is the truth.'
I sat on the bed, smoking, watching her face in the mirror as she combed her
hair, the smooth sheen of the glittering mass of palely shining hair, its
silvery fall on her shoulders. She leaned forward to look at herself, the glass
reflected the beginning of her small breasts. I watched them move with her
breathing, went and stood behind her, put my arms round her, covered them with
my hands. She pulled away from me. Not wanting to see her frightened
expression, I blew smoke in her face. She went on resisting, and I had an
impulse to do certain things with the lighted cigarette, dropped it on the
floor, put my foot on it. Then I pulled her closer to me. She struggled, cried:
'Don't! Leave me alone! I hate you! You're cruel and treacherous . . . you
betray people, break promises. . . .' I was impatient, I let her go and went
over to lock the door. Before I got there, a sound made me turn round. She was
holding a big bottle of eau-de-Cologne over her head, meaning to hit me with
it. I told her to put it down; she took no notice, so I went back and twisted
it out of her hand. She was not strong enough to put up a fight. There was no
more strength in her muscles than in a child's.
While she was getting dressed I continued to sit on the bed. We did not speak
to each other. She was ready, fastening her coat, when the door opened
suddenly: in my impatience just now, I had forgotten to go back and lock it. A
man came in. I jumped up to throw him out, but he walked past as though I was
invisible or not present.
A tall, athletic, arrogant looking man, with an almost paranoid air of
assurance. His very bright and blue eyes flashed a danger signal, seemed not to
see me. The girl was petrified, she did nothing at all. I did nothing either,
simply stood watching. It was unlike me. But he was a man who had entered with
a revolver for a specific purpose, and could not be prevented from carrying it
out. I wondered if he would shoot us both, and if so which first, or if only
one of us, which one. Such points were of interest to me.
It was clear that he regarded her as his property. I considered that she
belonged to me. Between the two of us she was reduced to nothing; her only
function might have been to link us together. His face wore the look of extreme
arrogance which always repelled me. Yet I suddenly felt an indescribable
affinity with him, a sort of blood-contact, generating confusion, so that I
began to wonder if there were two of us...
I was asked: 'What happened when you met your friend?' 'We did not meet.'
Subdued excitement broke out, an official voice had to order silence. The next
voice sounded like an actor's, trained in elocution. 'I wish to state that the
witness is a psychopath, probably schizoid, and therefore not to be believed.'
Someone interjected: 'Produce a psychiatrist's confirmation.' The theatrical
voice continued: 'I repeat, with all possible emphasis, that this man is known
to be a psychopath and totally unreliable. We are investigating an atrocious
crime against an innocent pure young girl: I ask you to note his unnatural
callousness, his indifferent expression. What cynicism to come here with that
flower in his buttonhole! How arrogantly he displays his utter contempt for the
sanctity of family life, and for all decent feeling! His attitude is not only
abnormal, but depraved, infamous, a desecration of all we hold sacred...
Somewhere high up in the room, where I could not see it, a bell rang. A
superior, unimplicated voice stated: 'A psychopath is not an acceptable
witness.'
I was taken away, locked in a cell for seventeen hours. In the early morning
they released me without explanation. In the meantime, the ship had gone, and
with it my luggage. I was stranded with only the clothes I was wearing.
Luckily, I had not been deprived of either my passport or my wallet, and was
well provided with money.
I had a shave, a wash and brush up, and looked carefully at my reflexion. I
needed a clean shirt, but the shops were not yet open; I would buy one later
and change. For the moment my appearance was passable, or would be when I had
got rid of the dead carnation. I meant to throw it into the gutter as I left
the barber's shop, but a boy just outside offered to clean my shoes, and while
he did so I asked him which was the best café. He pointed out one further
along the same street; I walked on, liked the look of it, and sat down at one
of the tables outside in the sun. At that hour the place was deserted. The
solitary waiter on duty brought coffee and rolls on a tray, then returned to
the dark interior, leaving me there alone. I drank the coffee, wondered what to
do next, watched the passers-by: there were not many of them so early.
A girl went past carrying a basket of flowers, reminding me that, in the end, I
had not disposed of the carnation. I tried to pull it out of my buttonhole, but
the stem had been securely pinned by the steward. I turned back my lapel,
peered down, felt about for the pin. Someone said: 'Let me do that for you.' I
looked up; the flower girl was smiling at me. I seemed to have seen her face
somewhere, I felt I already knew her and liked her. Having removed the
carnation neatly, she prepared to replace it with one exactly the same from her
basket. I was on the point of saying I did not want it, when something occurred
to me and I kept silent. She fixed the fresh flower in my buttonhole and
continued to stand beside me, though not as if she was merely waiting for
payment. It looked as if my idea was correct, but I said nothing in case I was
mistaken. I knew I had been right when she asked: 'Is there anything else you'd
like me to do?' I glanced round. The other tables were still deserted, the
people on the pavement were out of earshot. She had put down her basket on a
chair; I pretended to examine the flowers, picking up one bunch after another.
To anyone watching, even through field-glasses, we would have appeared to be
conducting a normal transaction. I said, 'Certainly;' though I wondered if she.
. . . But I had to find out without delay what had been going on in the world.
'I've been at sea; out of touch. There are lots of things you can tell me.'
I asked cautious questions, trying not to show the extent of my ignorance of
the latest developments. It appeared that the situation at home was obscure and
alarming, no precise information was coming through, the full extent of the
disaster was not yet known. The warden of a northern country had escaped to the
interior and joined forces with one of the various warlords, between whom
hostilities had broken out.
I went on questioning her. She was always polite and friendly, and tried to be
helpful. But her answers grew vague, she seemed afraid to commit herself. When
one or two people drifted into the café and sat down near us, she said in a
whisper: 'You'll have to discuss these matters with somebody higher up. Do you
want me to arrange it?' I agreed at once, but was rather sceptical about her
power to do this. She told me to wait, picked up her basket, and rushed off
down the street, half running. I thought I had probably seen the last of her,
but ordered more coffee, waited; I had nothing else to do. The news she had
given me of the warden's escape had relieved my mind, up to a point; it seemed
likely, though by no means certain, that he had taken the girl with him. Time
passed. There were plenty of people about now. I watched the street for my
informant's return. Just as I had decided she was not coming back, I saw her
hurrying towards me between the passers-by. As she came to my table she called
out: 'Here are the violets you wanted. I had to go all the way to the flower
market for them. I'm afraid they're rather expensive.' She was out of breath,
but made her voice sound clear and gay for the benefit of the people around us.
I saw that it would be no good trying to persuade her to stay, and asked: 'How
much?' She named a sum, I handed over the money. She thanked me with a charming
smile, darted away, and disappeared in the crowd.
The stalks of the violets were wrapped in paper with words written on it. I was
told where to find the man who might help me. The message was to be destroyed
immediately. I bought a canvas bag with leather handles and straps to hold a
few necessities, then booked at a hotel. When I had bathed and changed, I went
to the office of the man named on the paper, who saw me at once. He too was
wearing a red carnation. I should have to be careful.
I went straight to the point, there was no object in prevaricating. Naming the
town from which the warden was operating, I asked if it was possible for me to
get there. 'No. Fighting is going on in the area, night raids on the town. No
foreigners allowed in.' 'No exceptions?' He shook his head. 'Anyway, there's no
transport except for official personnel.' After all these negative statements,
I could only say: 'Then you advise me to give up the idea?' 'Officially
speaking, yes.' He looked at me slyly. 'But not necessarily.' His expression
was more encouraging. 'There's just a chance I may be able to help you. Anyway,
I'll see what can be done. But don't count on it. It will probably be a few
days before I have anything to report.' I thanked him. We stood up and shook
hands. He promised to notify me immediately he had any news.
I felt bored and restless. I had nothing to do. On the surface, the life of the
town appeared normal, but underneath it was coming gradually to a standstill.
The news from the north was scanty, confused, frightening. I realized that the
destruction must have been on a gigantic scale. Little could have survived. The
local broadcasters were cheerfully reassuring. It was the official policy, the
population had to be kept calm. But these men actually seemed to believe their
country would escape the cataclysm. I knew no country was safe, no matter how
far removed from the present devastation, which would spread and spread, and
ultimately cover the entire planet. Meanwhile, universal unrest was inevitable.
It was the worst possible sign that war had already started, even though on a
minor scale. That the more responsible governments were doing their utmost to
pacify the belligerents only stressed the explosive nature of the situation,
and the ominous threat of all-out warfare augmenting the present catastrophe.
My anxiety about the girl, which had subsided slightly, revived again. She had
gained nothing by escaping the destruction of one country, if she had gone to
another about to engage in a full scale war. I tried to believe the warden had
sent her to safety, but knew too much about him to feel sure of that. It was
absolutely essential for me to see him; otherwise I would never find out what
had happened to her. I spent the evening in different bars, listening to the
talk. His name was often mentioned, occasionally as a traitor to his own
people, more frequently as a new, powerful, unknown influence on the war issue,
a significant figure, a man to watch.
First thing in the morning the telephone rang in my room: someone wanted to see
me. I said the person was to come up, hoping for a message from the official.
'Hullo.' The flower girl entered, smiling and unselfconscious. She saw my
surprise. 'Forgotten me already?' I said I had not expected her here. She
looked surprised now. 'But you know it's part of my job to bring your flower
every morning.' I kept quiet while she fixed the carnation. It was fatally easy
to show my ignorance of the organization to which she belonged. I was curious
about it, but afraid of giving myself away. It occurred to me that, by spending
more time with her, I might pick up information without asking questions.
Besides, she was young and attractive, I liked her natural, matter-of-fact
behaviour. It would relieve the boredom.
I invited her to dinner that evening. Her manners were charming, she acted in
her usual engaging, unaffected way. Later we went to two night clubs, danced.
She was a delightful partner, seemed relaxed and talked freely, but told me
nothing I did not already know. I took her back to the hotel with me; the
porter looked the other way when we came in together. I was rather drunk. Her
full skirt fell in a shining ring on the floor of my room. Very early in the
morning, while I was still asleep, she left to go to the flower market; was
back at breakfast time with a fresh carnation, bright-eyed, cheerful, and full
of life, more attractive than she had been in the dark. I wanted to keep her
with me, to anchor myself in the present through her. But she said: 'No, I must
go now, I have my work to do;' then smiled in the friendliest way and promised
to dance with me in the evening. I never saw her again.
The official sent for me while I was reading the papers. I hurried round to his
office. He greeted me with a mysterious, conspiratorial air. 'I've been able to
arrange that matter for you. It'll be a bit of a rush.' He grinned, pleased
with himself, pleased to show me how he could manipulate events. I was
surprised and excited. He went on: 'A lorry happens to be leaving today with
important replacements for the new transmitter that's going up on our side of
the frontier. It's quite near the town you want. I've got you signed on as a
foreign consultant. You can do your homework on the way. It's all in here.' He
handed me a thick folder full of papers, a travel permit on top, told me to be
at the main post office in half an hour.
I thanked him profusely. He patted my arm. 'Think nothing of it. Glad I could
be useful.' Withdrawing his hand, he touched the flower in my buttonhole and
gave me a fright. Did he suspect something? If I had discovered nothing else
about his organization, I at least knew now that it had considerable power. I
was relieved when he said with a smile: 'Hurry back and collect your things.
You mustn't be late or any account. The driver has orders to leave on the dot,
and he won't wait for anyone.'
The room had been getting darker, a sudden storm had blown up. As his hand
moved to the light, a livid flash and a crash came together, a splatter of rain
hit the windows, and somebody wearing the long overcoat of a uniform entered
and signed to him not to touch the switch. I could only just distinguish a big,
heavily-built man, whose massive shape seemed vaguely familiar. He stood
talking to the official in undertones at the far end of the room, while I tried
unsuccessfully to hear the low but heated discussion, of which I knew I was the
subject, for they both kept glancing at me. It was obvious that I was being
denigrated. Although the newcomer's face remained indistinct, between
thunderclaps I could hear the accusing tone of his voice, but without being
able to catch the words. He seemed already to have succeeded in discrediting me
with the other man, who stood nearer the light, and showed signs of uneasiness
and suspicion.
I was getting very uneasy myself. My position would be most unpleasant if he
turned against me. Not only would I lose all hope of reaching the warden, but
be shown up as having made use of the red carnation under false pretences.
There was a serious danger that I would be re-arrested and put in prison again.
I looked at my watch. Several minutes of the half hour had elapsed, and,
feeling that I had to get out of the room quickly, I made an unobtrusive move
to the door, opening it with my hand behind me.
A terrific flash split the air, luridly lit up a sudden flurry of movement, the
folds of the overcoat swinging, its wearer pointing a gun. As I raised my
hands, he half turned to shout above the exploding thunder to the man to whom
he had been talking: 'What did I tell you?' The momentary dividing of his
attention gave me time to dive at his legs in a tackle I learnt at school,
while the shot went over my head. I did not manage to bring him down, but
caught him off balance, hampered by the length of the coat. Before he could aim
again, I had knocked the revolver out of his hand, sent it flying across the
room. He came at me directly, threw his whole weight against me in a vicious
onslaught, hitting hard with both fists. He was much heavier than I was, I
almost fell. The door saved me; clinging to it, I heard steps coming along the
passage. My opponent attacked me fiercely again, shouting to the official to
retrieve his gun. Once he got hold of it I was done for. In desperation, I
bashed the door into him, kicked him with all my strength, had the satisfaction
of seeing him fold up before I swung round. Two new figures materialized in my
way. I did not look at them, simply hurled them aside, one after the other,
heard one fall with a cry, and the crash of the door as he fell against it.
Nobody else tried to stop me; without looking back, I rushed down the corridor
and out of the building. Thanks to the thunder, the shot could not have been
heard beyond the adjoining office.
The storm continued to help me. I was not noticed outside, everyone had taken
shelter from the torrential rain. The streets were swimming with water, I was
wet through in a second, kept running as fast as I could, splashing along as if
in a shallow stream. Luckily I knew where the main post office was and made
straight for it. Instructions to detain me would have been telephoned to my
hotel, and anyhow I had no time to go there. As it was, the lorry driver was
starting his engine when I came up, waving my travel documents for him to see.
He scowled at me, and jerked his thumb at the back of the vehicle. I made a
final effort and scrambled up, subsided on to some- thing extremely hard.
Someone immediately shut out the rain and the daylight; there was a tremendous
lurch; we were off.
I was breathless, bruised all over and soaking wet, but I felt triumphant.
Four of us were crowded inside the lorry. It was dark, noisy and uncomfortable,
like being in some sort of tent with planks to sit on, but not enough head room
to sit up straight. Two on each plank, we crouched face to face in the
congested darkness, among stacked packing cases of different shapes and sizes.
I hardly noticed the painful jolting, I was so relieved to be there, actually
on my way, shut inside that cramped, comfortless, moving tent, where nobody
could see me. The storm gradually died out, but the rain still streamed down,
and eventually found its way through our canvas walls without damping my
spirits. It could not possibly make me any wetter than I already was.


EIGHT

I tried to make friends with my companions, young fellows straight from a
technical college; but they would not talk. They distrusted me because I was a
foreigner. When I asked questions, they suspected me of trying to find out
things that were to be kept secret, although I could see that they themselves
knew no secrets. They were incredibly naive. I felt I belonged to another
dimension, and became silent. By degrees they forgot about me and started
talking among themselves. They spoke of their work; of difficulties in
assembling the transmitter. Lack of materials; lack of trained personnel; lack
of funds; bad workmanship; unaccountable errors. I heard the word sabotage
muttered back and forth. The work was far behind schedule. The transmitter
should have been functioning at the end of the month. Now no one knew when it
would be finished. Exhausted, I closed my eyes, stopped listening.
Now and again an odd sentence reached me. Once I realized I was the subject of
their conversation; they thought I was asleep. 'He's been sent to spy on us,'
one of them said. 'To find out if we can be trusted. We must never tell him
anything, never answer his questions.' Their voices dropped, they were almost
whispering. 'I heard the professor say. . . . They don't explain. . . . Why
send us to the danger zone when other people. . . .' They were dissatisfied and
uneasy, and could not give me any information. I need not waste my time on
them.
Late at night we stopped at a small town. I knocked up a shop keeper, and, for
the second time, provided myself with a few essentials: soap, a razor, a change
of clothing. The place had only one garage: before we left in the morning, the
driver insisted on buying up the entire stock of petrol. The owner protested
indignantly; with supplies so restricted, he might not get any more. Our man
ignored this, told him to empty the pumps, and, in response to further outraged
protests, said: 'Shut up, and get on with it! That's an order.' Standing beside
him, I remarked mildly that the next person expecting to fill up here would be
in trouble. He gave me a scornful glance. 'He's got more hidden away somewhere.
They always have.' The petrol cans were crammed into the back with the rest of
the load, hardly leaving room for the four of us. I had the most uncomfortable
place, over the back axle.
Flaps were rolled up, we could see out. We were driving towards a distant
forest with a chain of mountains behind. A few miles from the town, the
metalled road ended. Now there were only two narrow tarred strips for the
wheels, as far apart as the width of the chassis. It got colder as we drove on;
the climate was changing, like the character of the land. The edge of the
forest was always in sight, gradually coming nearer: we passed less and less
cultivation, fewer and fewer people and villages. I began to see the sense of
storing the petrol. The road got steadily worse, full of ruts and holes.
Progress was difficult, slow, the driver kept swearing. When even the tarred
strips came to an end, I leaned over and tapped his shoulder, offered to take
turns with him at the wheel. Rather to my surprise, he agreed.
I had a more comfortable seat beside him, but found it an effort to handle the
heavy lorry. I had never driven one before, and until I got used to it, had to
concentrate on what I was doing. It was necessary to stop at intervals to
remove fallen rocks or tree trunks that blocked the way. The first time this
happened, I prepared to climb out to help the others, who had already jumped
down from the back and were struggling to shift the obstruction. I felt a light
touch and looked round. The driver's head made a just perceptible negative
movement. My ability to drive the truck had apparently raised me above such
duties in his estimation.
I offered him a cigarette. He accepted. I ventured a comment on the state of
the road. As the transmitter was so important and involved so much traffic, I
could not understand why a decent road had not been made. He said: 'We can't
afford new roads. We asked the other nations associated with us in the
undertaking to contribute, but they refused.' Frowning, he gave me a sidelong
glance to see where my sympathies lay. I said in a non-commital tone that this
seemed unfair. 'Just because we're a small, impoverished country, they've
treated us badly all along the line.' He could not suppress his resentment.
'The transmitter could never have been built here at all if we hadn't donated
the site. They should remember that we made the whole thing possible. We
sacrifice a piece of our land for the general good, but get nothing in return.
They won't even send ground troops to help to protect the position. It's their
unsympathetic attitude that creates bad feeling.' He spoke bitterly. I could
feel his grudge against the big powers. 'You're a stranger ... I shouldn't be
saying such things to you.' He looked at me with anxiety: I assured him I was
not an informer.
Now that he had begun, he wanted to go on talking. I encouraged him to tell me
about himself; it was the way to get him to speak of the things I was
interested in. When the project first started, he had driven parties of workers
along this road; they used to sing on the way. 'You remember the old formula--
"all men of goodwill to unite in the task of world recovery and against the
forces of destruction." They made the words into a sort of part song, men and
women singing them together. It was inspiring to listen. We were all full of
enthusiasm in those days. Now everything's different.' I asked what had gone
wrong. 'Too many setbacks, delays, disappointments. The work would have been
finished long ago if we'd had the materials. But everything had to come from
abroad; from countries with different standards of measurement. Sometimes parts
did not fit together; whole consignments had to go back. You can imagine the
effect of such incidents on young enthusiasts, eager to get the job done.' It
was the usual story of mistakes and muddles due to different ideologies, lack
of direct contact. I thanked him for speaking frankly about these matters. A
ball neatly volleyed, back bounced the cliché: 'Contact between individuals is
the first step towards a better understanding between peoples.'
I seemed to have won his confidence. He became quite friendly, told me about
his girl, showed snapshots of her playing with a dog. I considered it unwise to
let people know that I carried a sum of money, so drew his attention to
something at the roadside while I quickly took out of my wallet the photograph
I still kept there of the girl standing beside a lake. I showed it to him,
saying that she had disappeared and that I was looking for her. Without any
special feeling, he commented: 'Wonderful hair. You're in luck.' I asked rather
sharply whether he would think himself lucky if his girl had vanished off the
face of the earth, and he had the grace to look slightly embarrassed. I put the
photo away, asked if he'd ever seen hair like that. 'No, never.' He shook his
head emphatically. 'Most of our women are dark.' It was no use talking to him
about her.
We changed places. I was tired after my stint of driving and shut my eyes. When
I opened them again he had a gun lying across his knees. I asked what he
expected to shoot. 'We're getting near the frontier. It's dangerous here.
Enemies everywhere.' 'But this country is neutral.' 'What's neutral? It's just
a word.' He added mysteriously: 'Besides, there are various kinds of enemies.'
'Such as?' 'Saboteurs. Spies. Gangsters. All sorts of scoundrels who flourish
in times of disorder.' I asked if he thought the lorry would be attacked. 'It
has happened. The stuff we've got on board is urgently needed. If they've got
to hear about it they may try to stop us.'
I brought out my automatic, saw him glancing at it with interest, evidently
impressed by the foreign weapon. We had just entered the forest. He seemed
nervous. 'This is where the danger begins.' The tall trees had long grey beards
of moss hanging down from their branches, forming opaque screens. It looked a
good place to hide. The light was starting to fade, and what was left of it
fell on the road, so that it was easy to imagine invisible eyes watching us. I
kept a lookout for gunmen, but had other things on my mind.
I spoke to the driver about the warden. He knew only what he had read in the
newspapers. The distance to his headquarters from the transmitter was about
twenty miles. 'Can one go there?' 'Go there?' He stared at me blankly. 'Of
course not. It's enemy country. And they've destroyed the road, blocked the
pass. There can't be much of the town left, anyhow. We hear the guns pounding
it at night.' He was more interested in reaching our destination in daylight.
'We must get out of the forest before dark. We'll just make it, with any luck.'
He drove furiously, the lorry bounced and skidded over loose stones.
I was too depressed to go on talking. The situation was hopeless. I needed the
girl, could not live without her. But I should never be able to find her. There
was no road to the town, I should never get there, it was impossible. In any
case, the place was under constant bombardment and must have been destroyed.
There was no object in going there. She had either left or been killed long
ago. I felt in despair. I seemed to have come all this way for nothing.
The site for the transmitter had been carefully chosen, high up, surrounded by
forest, backed by mountains, an easy place to defend against ground attack.
They had cleared the area immediately around the installation, but the trees
were not far away. We lived in prefabricated buildings that let in the rain.
Everything felt damp to the touch. The floors were concrete, always covered in
mud. Everywhere we walked became a morass. Everyone grumbled about the
discomfort and the poor quality of the food.
Something had gone wrong with the weather. It should have been hot, dry, sunny;
instead it rained all the time, there was a dank chill in the air. Thick white
mists lay entangled in the tops of the forest trees; the sky was a perpetually
steaming cauldron of cloud. The forest creatures were disturbed, and departed
from their usual habits. The big cats lost their fear of man, came up to the
buildings, prowled round the transmitter; strange unwieldy birds flopped
overhead. I got the impression that birds and animals were seeking us out for
protection against the unknown danger we had unloosed. The abnormalities in
their behaviour seemed ominous.
To pass the time and for want of something better to do, I organized the work
on the transmitter. It was not far from completion, but the workers had grown
discouraged and apathetic. I assembled them and spoke of the future. The
belligerents would listen and be impressed by the impartial accuracy of our
reports. The soundness of our arguments would convince them. Peace would be
restored. Danger of universal conflict averted. This was to be the final reward
of their labours. In the meantime, I divided them into teams, arranged
competitions, awarded prizes to those who worked best. Soon we were ready to
start broadcasting. I recorded events on both sides with equal respect for
truth, put out programmes on world peace, urged an immediate cease fire. The
minister wrote, congratulating me on my work.
I could not make up my mind whether to cross the frontier or to stay where I
was. I did not think the girl could be alive in the demolished town. If she had
been killed there it was pointless to go. If she was safe somewhere else there
was no point in going either. Considerable personal risk was involved. Although
a non-combatant, I was liable to be shot as a spy, or imprisoned indefinitely.
But I was becoming tired of the work here now that everything was running
smoothly. I was tired of trying to keep dry in the perpetual rain, tired of
waiting to be overtaken by ice. Day by day the ice was creeping over the curve
of the earth, unimpeded by seas or mountains. Without haste or pause, it was
steadily moving nearer, entering and flattening cities, filling craters from
which boiling lava had poured. There was no way of stopping the icy giant
battalions, marching in relentless order across the world, crushing,
obliterating, destroying everything in their path.
I made up my mind to go. Without telling anyone, in the drenching rain, I drove
to the blocked pass, and from there found my way over the tree covered
mountains on foot. I had only a pocket compass to guide me. It took me several
hours of climbing and struggling through wet vegetation to reach the frontier
station, where I was detained by the guard.


NINE

I asked to be taken to the warden. He had lately moved his headquarters to a
different town. An armoured car drove me there; two soldiers with submachine
guns came too, 'for my protection'. It was still raining. We crashed through
the downpour under heavy black clouds which shut out the last of the day.
Darkness was falling as we entered the town. The headlights showed the familiar
scene of havoc, rubble, ruins, blank spaces, all glistening in rain. The
streets were full of troops. The least damaged buildings were used as barracks.
I was taken into a heavily-guarded place and left in a small room where two men
were waiting. The three of us were alone: they stared at me, but said nothing.
We waited in silence. There was only the sound of the rain beating down
outside. They sat together on one bench; I, wrapped in my coat, on another.
That was all the furniture in the room, which had not been cleaned. Thick dust
lay over everything.
After a while they began to converse in whispers. I gathered that they had come
about some post that was vacant. I stood up, started pacing backwards and
forwards. I was restless, but knew I should have to wait. I was not listening
to what the others were saying, but one raised his voice so that I had to hear.
He was certain that he would get the job. He boasted: 'I've been trained to
kill with my hands. I can kill the strongest man with three fingers. I've
learnt the points in the body where you can kill easily. I can break a block of
wood with the side of my hand.' His words depressed me. This was the kind of
man who was wanted now. The two were presently called to an interview and I was
left waiting alone. I was prepared to have to wait a long time.
It was not so long before a guard came to conduct me to the officers' mess. The
warden was sitting at the head of the high table. Other long tables were more
crowded. I was to sit at his table, but not near him, at the far end. We should
be too far apart to talk comfortably. Before taking my seat, I went up to
salute him. He looked surprised and did not return my greeting. I noticed all
the men sitting round immediately leaned together and began speaking in
undertones, glancing furtively at me. I seemed to have made an unfavourable
impression. I had assumed he would remember me, but he appeared not to know who
I was. To remind him of our former connexion might make things worse, so I sat
down in my distant place.
I could hear him talking amiably to the officers near him. Their conversation
was of arrests and escapes. I was not interested until he told the story of his
own flight, involving; big car, a snowstorm, crashing frontier gates, bullets,
a girl. He never once looked in my direction or took any notice of me.
From time to time troops could be heard marching past outside. Suddenly there
was an explosion. Part of the ceiling collapsed and the lights went out.
Hurricane lamps were brought and put on the table. They showed fragments of
plaster lying among the dishes. The food was ruined, uneatable, covered in dust
and debris. It was taken away. A long and tedious wait followed; then finally
bowls of hard boiled eggs were put down in front of us. Intermittent explosions
continued to shake the building, a haze of whitish dust hung in the air,
everything was gritty to touch.
The warden was playing a game of surprising me. He beckoned at the end of the
meal. 'I enjoyed your broadcasts. You have a gift for that sort of thing.' I
was astonished that he knew of the work I had been doing. His voice was
friendly, he spoke to me as an equal, and just for a moment, I felt identified
with him in an obscure sort of intimacy. He went on to say I had timed my
arrival well. 'Our transmitter will soon be in operation, and yours will be put
out of action.' I had always told the authorities we needed a more powerful
installation; that it was only a question of time before the existing apparatus
was jammed by a stronger one. He assumed that I had heard this was about to
happen, and had defected accordingly. He wanted me to broadcast propaganda for
him, which I agreed to do, if he would do something for me. 'Still the same
thing?' 'Yes.' He looked at me in amusement, but suspicion flashed in his eyes.
Nevertheless he remarked casually, 'Her room's on the floor above; we may as
well pay her a visit,' and led the way out. But when I said, 'I have to deliver
a personal message; could I see her alone?' he did not reply.
We went down one passage, up some stairs and along another. The beam of his
powerful torch played on floors littered with rubbish. Footprints showed in the
dust; I looked among them for her smaller prints. He opened a door into a dimly
lit room. She jumped up. Her white startled face; big eyes staring at me under
glittering hair. 'You again!' She stood rigid, held the chair in front of her
as for protection, hands clenched on the back, knuckles standing out white.
'What do you want?' 'Only to talk to you.' Looking from one of us to the other,
she accused: 'You're in league together.' I denied it: though in a strange way
there seemed to be some truth in the charge. . . . 'Of course you are. He
wouldn't bring you here otherwise.'
The warden approached her, smiling. I had never seen him look so benevolent.
'Come now, that's not a very kind way to greet an old friend. Can't we all have
a friendly talk? You've never told me how you first got to know each other.' It
was clear that he had no intention of leaving us alone. I gazed at her
silently, could not talk to her in front of him. His personality was too
dominant, his influence too strong. In his presence she was frightened,
antagonistic. Barriers were created. I was distracted myself. No wonder he
smiled. I might as well not have found her. A distant explosion shook the
walls; she watched the white dust float down from the ceiling. For the sake of
saying something, I asked if the bombing disturbed her. Her face blank, her
bright hair shimmering, she silently moved her head in a way that meant
anything, nothing.
The warden said: 'I've tried to persuade her to go to a safer place, but she
refuses to leave.' He smiled complacently, showing me his power over her. I
found it hard to accept. I looked round the room: the chair, a small mirror, a
bed, paperbacks on the table, dust everywhere, fallen plaster thick on the
floor. Her grey loden coat hung from a hook. I saw no other personal belongings
except a comb and a square of chocolate in torn silver paper. I turned away
from the man and addressed her directly, trying to speak as if he was not
there. 'You don't seem very comfortable here. Why not go to a hotel, somewhere
further away from the fighting?' She did not answer, shrugged her shoulders
slightly. A silence followed.
Troops marched past under the window. He went across, opened the shutters a
crack and looked down. I muttered hurriedly, 'I only want to help you,' moved
my hand towards hers, which was snatched back. 'I don't trust you. I don't
believe a word you say.' Her eyes were wide and defiant. I knew I would never
succeed in making contact with her while he was in the room. Nothing was to be
gained by staying longer. I left.
Outside the door, I heard his laugh, his step on the floorboards, his voice:
'What have you got against that one?' Then her voice, changed, blurred with
tears, high-pitched, hysterical. 'He's a liar. I know he's working with you.
You're both the same, selfish, treacherous, cruel. I wish I'd never met either
of you, I hate you both! One day I'll go . . . you won't see me again . . .
ever!' I walked on down the passage, stumbling over the rubble, kicking it
aside. I had not thought of providing myself with a torch.
For the next few days I considered taking her away from him to a neutral
country. Theoretically it was quite possible. Occasional ships still called at
the local port. It was a matter of speed, secrecy and exact timing. Success
depended on getting to sea before we were followed. I began making cautious
inquiries. The answers could be bought. The difficulty was that no one could be
trusted. The person I was paying for information might sell my questions to
somebody in the warden's pay. This made the whole thing highly dangerous. I was
nervous; I could not afford to take such risks; nevertheless, the risk had to
be run.
Voices whispered secrets: names, addresses, destinations, departures. 'Go to .
. . ask for . . . hold yourself in instant readiness . . . documents . . .
proof . . . ample funds. . . I needed to speak to her before taking my plans a
stage further. I went to her room, heard a shot, paid no attention; shooting
was going on in the streets all the time. The man emerged, shut the door behind
him. I said I wanted to see her. 'You can't.' He turned the key, dropped it
into his pocket, threw a pistol down on the table. 'She's dead.' A knife went
through me. All other deaths in the world were outside; this one was in my
body, like a bayonet, like my own. 'Who killed her?' Only I could do that. When
he said, 'I did,' my hand moved, touched the gun, the barrel was hot. I could
have seized it and shot him. It would have been easy. He made no move to
prevent me, stood motionless, gazing at me. I looked back at him, at his face
with its arrogant bone structure; our eyes met.
In an indescribable way our looks tangled together. I seemed to be looking at
my own reflexion. Suddenly I was entangled in utmost confusion, not sure which
of us was which. We were like halves of one being, joined in some mysterious
symbiosis. I fought to retain my identity, but all my efforts failed to keep us
apart. I continually found I was not myself, but him. At one moment I actually
seemed to be wearing his clothes. I fled from the room in utter confusion:
afterwards did not know what had happened, or if anything had.
On another occasion he met me at the door of the room, said at once: 'You're
too late. The bird's flown.' He was grinning, his face wore an expression of
naked malice. 'She's gone. Run away. Disappeared.' My fists clenched. 'You sent
her away so that I shouldn't see her. You've deliberately kept us apart.' I
started towards him in fury. Then again our looks tangled, confusion came back;
a wider confusion, not of identity only, but also of time and place. Gold blue
eyes flashing, the blue flash of a ring, curved cold strangler's fingers. He
had fought bears and strangled them with his hands. Physically I was no match.
... As I left, I heard his voice jeering: 'That's more sensible.'
I went into an empty room. I needed time in which to collect myself. I was
disturbed, I longed for the girl, could not bear to have lost her. I thought of
the journey I had been planning with her beside me, which would now never take
place. My face was wet as with rain, drops ran down into my mouth, tasted salt.
I covered my eyes with my handkerchief, brought myself under control by a
violent effort.
I should have to start searching for her all over again. The repetition was
like a curse. I thought of placid blue seas, tranquil islands, far away from
war. I thought of the Indris, those happy creatures, symbols of life in peace,
on a higher plane. I could clear out, go to them. No, that was impossible. I
was tied to her. I thought of the ice moving across the world, casting its
shadow of creeping death. Ice cliffs boomed in my dreams, indescribable
explosions thundered and boomed, icebergs crashed, hurled huge boulders into
the sky like rockets. Dazzling ice stars bombarded the world with rays, which
splintered and penetrated the earth, filling earth's core with their deadly
coldness, reinforcing the cold of the advancing ice. And always, on the
surface, the indestructible ice-mass was moving forward, implacably destroying
all life. I felt a fearful sense of pressure and urgency, there was no time to
lose, I was wasting time; it was a race between me and the ice. Her albino hair
illuminated my dreams, shining brighter than moonlight. I saw the dead moon
dance over the icebergs, as it would at the end of our world, while she watched
from the tent of her glittering hair.
I dreamed of her whether I was asleep or awake. I heard her cry: 'One day I'll
go . . . you won't see me again. . . .' She had gone from me already. She had
escaped. She hurried along a street in an unknown town. She looked different,
less anxious, more confident. She knew exactly where she was going, she did not
hesitate once. In a huge official building she made straight for a room so
crowded she could hardly open the door. Only her extreme slimness enabled her
to slip between the many tall silent figures, unnaturally silent, fantastically
tall, whose faces were all averted from her. Her anxiety started to come back
when she saw them towering over her, surrounding her like dark trees. She felt
small and lost among them, quickly became afraid. Her confidence had vanished;
it had never been real. Now she only wanted to escape from that place: her eyes
darted from side to side, saw no door, no way out. She was trapped. The
faceless black tree- forms pressed closer, extended arm-branches, imprisoning
her. She looked down, but was still imprisoned. Filled trouser-legs, solid
treetrunks, stood all around. The floor had become dark earth, full of roots
and boles. Quickly looking up at the window, she saw only white weaving meshes
of snow, shutting out the world. The known world excluded, reality blotted out,
she was alone with threatening nightmare shapes of trees or phantoms, tall as
firs growing in snow.
Global conditions were worsening. There was no sign of destruction coming to a
halt, and its inexorable progress induced general demoralization. It was more
impossible than ever to find out what was really happening, impossible to know
what to believe. No reliable source of information existed. Very little news of
any description came from abroad; none whatsoever from once-prominent states
which had simply dropped out of existence. More than any other single factor,
it was the implacable spread of these unnerving areas of total silence that
undermined public morale.
In certain countries civil unrest had resulted in the army taking command. A
world-wide swing towards militarism had taken place during recent months, with
deplorable and brutalizing effects. Frequent clashes occurred between civilians
and the armed forces. The killing of police and soldiers, with retributory
executions, had become commonplace.
As was to be expected, in the absence of any genuine news, fantastic rumours
kept circulating. Monstrous epidemics, appalling famines, were said to have
broken out in remote districts, fearsome deviations to have occurred from the
genetic norm. Stocks of thermo-nuclear weapons, previously supposed to have
been destroyed, were periodically reported to be in the possession of this or
that power. Persistent rumours concerned the existence of a self-detonating
cobalt bomb, timed, at a pre-set, unknown moment, to destroy all life, while
leaving inanimate objects intact. Spying and counter-spying went on everywhere.
There were growing acute shortages in all countries, food riots followed as a
matter of course. The lawless element in the population was much in evidence,
decent people were terrorized. The death penalty imposed for looting had little
or no effect as a deterrent.
I got news of the girl indirectly. She was alive, in a certain town, in another
country. I was almost sure the place was in the area of immediate danger,
though there was no means of checking the point, since all reference to the
advancing ice was forbidden. By intense persistence and extensive bribery, I
managed to board a ship travelling in that direction. The captain wanted to
make money fast, and for a large sum agreed to put in at the port I named.
We arrived. It was early morning, unbelievably cold, dark when it should have
been light. No sky, no clouds, they were hidden by falling snow. It was not a
morning like other mornings, but what it was: an unnatural freezing of day into
darkness, spring into arctic winter. I went to say goodbye to the captain, who
asked if I had changed my mind about going ashore. I said I had not. 'Then for
God's sake get going. Don't keep us hanging about.' He was angry, antagonistic.
We parted without more words.
I went on deck with the first officer. The air stung like acid. It was the
breath of ice, of the polar regions, almost unbreathable. It scarified the
skin, seared the lungs; but the body quickly adjusted itself to this
stringency. The density of the snow created a curious foglike gloom in the
upper air. Every thing was obscured by the small flakes falling ceaselessly out
of the shrouded sky. The cold scalded my hands when I collided with iced-up
parts of the ship's superstructure, which only became visible when it was too
late to avoid them. In the silence I noticed a rhythmic vibration below, and
spoke to my escort: 'The engines; they haven't stopped.' For some reason it
seemed surprising. 'You bet they haven't. The skipper can't wait to turn the
ship round. He's been cursing you for days for making us put in here.' The man
showed the same antagonism as the captain, plus a disagreeable curiosity which
came out now. 'Why the devil have you come, anyhow? 'That's my business.' In
unfriendly silence we reached the rail. It was cased in thick ice, a rope
ladder dangling from it towards the sound of a motor running below. Before I
had time to look down, he swung his leg over. 'Harbour's frozen. We've got to
put you ashore by launch.' While he quickly descended with practised ease, I
followed more awkwardly, clinging on with both hands, blinded by the snow. I
did not see who pulled me into the rocking launch, or who pushed me towards a
seat as it immediately shot forward. Travelling at full speed, it plunged and
reared continually like a bucking horse, sheet of spray flew over the roof of
the little cabin. There was too much noise for voices to be audible; but I
could feel the almost murderous hostility of those on board, all hating me for
keeping them here in danger when they might have been on the way to safety. To
them my behaviour must have seemed perverse and utterly senseless. I began to
wonder myself whether it made any sense, sitting huddled up in my coat, in the
brutal paralyzing cold.
A sudden long-drawn-out yell startled me; it was really more of a howl. The
officer jumped up, shouted back through a megaphone, then resumed his seat with
the words: 'One way traffic.' Seeing that I did not understand, he added,
'Plenty going the other way,' and pointed ahead.
A confused indistinct commotion revealed itself as a ship, motionless in the
midst of the feverish activity of small boats seething round it. In frantic
competition, they fought to get near enough for their occupants to climb
aboard. There was not room for all. Spectators crowded the rails of the ship as
if at a race course, watching the collisions and capsizings below. Those in the
boats had probably lived easily and been unaccustomed to danger, for they
battled clumsily for their lives, with a sort of headlong terror, wasting their
strength in useless jostling and surging. One boat floated upside down,
surrounded by frenzied hands and arms struggling out of the water. The people
in the next boat swarmed over it, hit out, kicked, stamped on the clinging
hands, beat off the drowning. Even the most powerful swimmer could not survive
long in that freezing sea. Several of the overcrowded unskillfully handled
boats turned over and sank. Some broke up after colliding. In those that
remained afloat, the passengers crushed and trampled each other in senseless
panic, drove off clutching swimmers with oars. People already dying were
battered and beaten. The muffled uproar of screams, thuds, splashes, continued
long after the scene was hidden behind the snow. I recalled polite voices
announcing over the air that people were desperate, fighting to get away from
the threatened countries to safer regions.
The frozen harbour was a grey-white expanse, dotted with black abandoned hulks,
embedded immovably in the ice. Banks of solid ice edged the narrow channel of
blackish water, fringed with grinning icicle-teeth. I jumped ashore, snow blew
out in great fans, the launch disappeared from sight. There were no goodbyes.


TEN

It could have been any town, in any country. I recognized nothing. Snow covered
all landmarks with the same white padding. Buildings were changed into
anonymous white cliffs.
A confused disturbance, shouts, the noise of wood splintering and glass
breaking came from one of the streets where looting was going on. A crowd had
broken into the shops. They had no leader, no fixed objective. They were just a
disorderly mob surging about in search of excitement and booty, frightened,
hungry, hysterical, violent. They kept fighting among themselves, picking up
anything that could be used as a weapon, snatching each other's spoils, taking
possession of all they could lay hands on, even the most useless objects, then
dropping them and running after some other plunder. What they could not take
away they destroyed. They had a senseless mania for destruction, for tearing to
shreds, smashing to smithereens, trampling underfoot.
A senior army officer appeared in the street and blew a whistle to summon the
police. Striding towards the looters, he shouted orders in a fierce military
voice, blew repeated blasts on the whistle. His face was dark with rage, framed
by the astrakan collar of his fine overcoat. The main mass of the crowd fled at
the sight of him. But some, bolder than the rest, stayed skulking among the
wreckage. Furious, he strode towards them, threatened them with his cane,
shouted to them to clear off, swore at them. They took no notice at first; then
formed a rough circle, rushed at him from several points simultaneously, in
groups of three or four together. He pulled out his revolver, fired it over
their heads. A mistake: he should have fired at them. They swarmed round him,
trying to snatch the weapon. The police were a long time coming. There was a
scuffle. In the course of it, either by accident or intention, the gun was
dropped through a grating. Its owner was a man in the late fifties, tall,
vigorous. But I could see him panting. They were young toughs with faces of a
sinister blankness. They attacked cunningly, with bits of metal and broken
glass, pieces of smashed furniture, whatever came to hand. He fended them off
with his cane, keeping his back to a wall. Their numbers and their persistence
were gradually wearing him down; his movements were getting slower. A stone was
thrown. Then a shower of stones. One of them knocked his cap off. The sight of
his hairless skull produced ribald shouting, and for a second he seemed
disconcerted. They took advantage of this, closed in, set on him like a pack of
wolves. Blood trickling down his face, back to the wall, he still managed to
fight them off. Then I saw something flash: someone had used a knife. Others
followed suit. He clutched his chest, blindly staggered forward. The moment he
left the wall he was done for, they were on him from every side. They knocked
him down, sprang on top of him, tore his coat off, beat his head on the frozen
ground, stamped on him, kicked him, slashed his face with chains. Finally he
lay still on the snow. He had had absolutely no chance. It was murder.
It was not my affair, but I could not see it and stand there doing nothing.
They were society's dregs, they would never have dared come near him in normal
times, far less touch him. A little jeering fellow had draped himself in the
fine overcoat and was dancing about, tripping over the trailing hem. I was
disgusted, furious. In uncontrollable fury I charged at him. stripped off the
coat, twisted his arms, punched and pummeled him, slung him across the
pavement, heard a satisfactory crunch when his screaming face hit the wall.
Turning, I confronted a man twice his size, half saw a boot flick out. Acute
pain in my leg made me stumble: I recovered just in time to see his arm swing
up in a practiced curve, and reacted as I had been trained. A textbook fall;
flat on my back, one foot locking his ankle, I caught the glint of the falling
knife, as my other leg bashed the trapped kneecap until it cracked. In a moment
I would have the entire crew swarming all over me. I had no more chance than
the officer against the lot of them with their knives; but I meant to do some
damage before they finished me off. Suddenly there were shots, shouts, the
sound of running feet: the police had arrived at last. I watched them chase the
looters round a corner into another street; then limped over to the man on the
ground.
He lay on his back, bleeding from many wounds. Not much past the prime of life,
he had looked impressive, a tall, vital, imposing man, still desirable
physically. Now his nose had been flattened, his mouth slit at the corners, one
eye was half out of its socket, his whole face and head discoloured with blood
and dirt, the shapes lost and distorted. Blood was everywhere. They had almost
torn off his right arm. He did not move, I could not see his breathing. I knelt
down, opened his tunic, his shirt, put my hand on his chest. The heart was not
to be felt, and my hand came out sticky with blood. I wiped it on my
handkerchief, then went for his coat, spread it over him, hiding the mess. I
wanted to leave him some dignity. He was a stranger to whom I had never spoken;
but he was my sort of man; we were not like that rabble. It was an outrage that
they should have killed him. They must have cringed before him in his strength
and power. This was how they treated him when they caught him alone, no longer
young, and at a disadvantage. It was disgusting. I regretted not having
inflicted more punishment on them.
I remembered the revolver, stooped over the grating. There was just room for my
fingers between the bars, and I pulled it up, put it into my pocket, moved on.
I was still limping badly, my leg was painful. Suddenly someone shouted, a shot
zipped past. I stopped, waited until the police overtook me.
'Who are you? What are you doing here? Why did you touch the body? It's not
allowed.' Before I could answer, there was a rasping noise and a ground floor
window burst open, dislodging masses of snow from the sill, a woman's head
stuck out just beside me. 'This man's brave. He deserves a medal. I saw what
happened. He rushed in and tackled the lot of them singlehanded, although they
had knives and he was unarmed. I saw everything from this window.' A policeman
wrote down her name and address in his notebook.
Their attitude became more friendly; but they insisted that I should go to the
station and make a report. One of them took my arm. 'It's only in the next
street. You look as if you could do with some first aid.' I had to go in. It
was unfortunate: I did not want to give an account of myself and my movements
and motives. Besides, the revolver would make things awkward if it was noticed;
they were bound to recognize the service pattern. When I took off my coat, I
arranged it carefully so that the bulge did not show. They patched me up,
strapped my leg with plaster. I had a wash, drank some strong coffee with rum
in it. The chief interviewed me alone. He glanced at my papers, but gave the
impression of being preoccupied with something else: it was not possible to ask
if he had any precise information about the advancing ice. We exchanged
cigarettes, discussed the food problem. He said rations were short, and
distributed according to the value to the community of each individual's work:
'No work, no food.' His face showed signs of strain while he was talking; the
crisis must be nearer than I had supposed. Planning my questions deliberately,
I asked about refugees. Gangs of starving fugitives from the ice were a problem
in all the surviving countries. 'If they're able to work we let them stay. We
need all the workers we can get.' I said: 'Doesn't that create difficulties?
How do you manage to house them all?' 'There are camps for the men. We put the
women in hostels.' I had been leading up to this point. Pretending to take a
professional interest, I inquired: 'Would I be allowed to look over one of
these places?' 'Why not?' His smile was tired. I could not tell whether he was
exceptionally civilized or merely indifferent. Before I left he gave me an
address. Things had turned out very much better than I had expected. I had got
the information I wanted, and a good army revolver.
I went to look for her. It was snowing again, the wind was colder and stronger.
The streets were deserted, there was nobody to direct me. I thought I had found
the house, but saw no sign. Perhaps I was too late: through an unaccountable
failure of impulse had waited too long. ... I tried the street doors as I
passed them; they were all locked.
The door of one house was unfastened. I entered without hesitation. Inside, the
place was bare and shabby, had the look of an institution. The rooms were
unheated. She sat wearing her grey overcoat, her legs wrapped in something that
looked like a curtain. As soon as she saw me she threw this aside and sprang
up. 'You! I suppose he sent you--didn't you get my message?' 'No one sent me.
What message?' 'I left a message telling you not to follow me.' I said I had
not received it, but if I had it would have made no difference, I should have
come just the same. Her big distrustful eyes gazed at me, indignant and
frightened. 'I don't want anything to do with either of you.' I ignored this.
'You can't stay here alone.' 'Why not? I'm getting on all right.' I asked what
she was doing. 'Working.' 'How much do they pay you?' 'We get our food.' 'No
money?' 'Sometimes people are given money when they've worked specially hard.'
Defensively she went on: 'I'm too thin for the really hard jobs. They say I
haven't got enough stamina.' I had been watching her: she looked half-starved,
as if for some time she had not had enough to eat. Her thin wrists had always
fascinated me; now I could scarcely take my eyes off them, emerging like sticks
from the heavy sleeves. Instead of inquiring into the nature of the work she
was doing, I asked her plans for the future. When she snapped: 'Why should I
tell you?' I knew that she had no plans. I said I very much wished she would
look on me as a friend. 'Why? I've no reason to. Anyhow, I don't need friends.
I can manage alone.' I told her I had come hoping to take her away with me to a
place where life would be easier, somewhere in a better climate. I felt her
beginning to weaken, waved my hand at the window covered in heavy frost, snow
banked on the sill to half its whole height. 'Haven't you had enough of the
cold?' She could no longer hide her nervousness, her hands twisted together. I
added: 'Besides, you're in the danger zone here.' Her face was starting to have
its bruised look, she was gradually losing control. 'What danger?' The pupils
of her eyes dilated as I watched her. 'The ice. . . .' I meant to say more, but
the two words were sufficient. Her whole appearance indicated fear, she began
to tremble.
I moved closer to her, touched her hand. She jerked it away. 'Don't do that!' I
held a fold of her coat, looked at her angry, frightened face of a child
betrayed, the look of faint bruising around the eyes like a child that has
cried a long time. 'Leave me alone!' She tried to drag the heavy material out
of my hand. 'Go away!' I did not move. 'Then I'll go!' She tore herself free,
dashed to the door, threw her whole weight against it. It crashed open so
violently that she lost her balance and fell. The bright hair spread on the
floor, quicksilver, brilliant, stirring, alive, on the dark, dull, dead, dirty
floor. I picked her up. She struggled, gasped: 'Let me go! I hate you, I hate
you!' She had no strength at all. It was like holding a struggling kitten. I
shut the door and turned the key in the lock.
I waited a few days although waiting was difficult. It was time to go. It was
only a matter of hours before a disaster of the greatest magnitude. In spite of
the secrecy which enveloped the subject, news must have leaked out. Agitated
activity suddenly spread through the town. From my window I watched a young man
running from house to house, delivering a message of terror. In an
astonishingly short time, minutes only, the street was full of people carrying
bags and bundles. Disorganized, and showing every sign of acute fear, they set
off in great haste, some going one way and some another. They seemed to have no
definite destination or plan, just the one overwhelming urge to fly from the
town. I was surprised that the authorities took no action. Presumably they had
failed to evolve a workable scheme for evacuation, so simply decided to let
things take their course. The chaotic exodus was disturbing to watch. Everybody
seemed on the verge of panic. People clearly thought I was mad to sit in a bar
instead of preparing for flight. Their fears were infectious, the atmosphere of
impending catastrophe made me uneasy and I was thankful to get the message I
was expecting. A ship was about to anchor outside the harbour, somewhere beyond
the ice. It was the last one that would call, and it would stay at anchor for
one hour only.
I went to the girl, told her this was our last chance, and that she had to
come. She refused, refused to stand up. 'I'm not going anywhere with you. I
don't trust you. I shall stay here where I'm free.' 'Free for what? To starve?
To be frozen to death?' I lifted her off the chair bodily, stood her on her
feet. 'I won't go--you can't force me.' She backed away, wide-eyed, and stood
against the wall, waiting for someone or something to rescue her. I lost
patience, dragged her out of the building, went on holding her arm; I had to
pull her along.
It was snowing so hard I could barely see to the other side of the street; a
stark, white, deathly, pre-polar scene. The arctic wind drove floods of snow
past us like feathers. Walking was difficult, the wind slammed the snow in our
faces, hurled it at us from different sides, whirled it round us in crazy
spirals. Everything was muffled, blurred, indistinct, not a person to be seen.
Then suddenly six mounted policemen rode out of the blizzard, hooves soundless
and bridles jingling. The girl cried, 'Help!' when she saw them. She thought
they would save her, tried to struggle free, made an imploring gesture with her
free hand. I held on to her tight, kept her close beside me. The men laughed
and whistled at us as they passed, disappearing in the blowing white. She burst
into tears.
I heard a bell ringing, slowly coming nearer. An old priest shuffled round the
corner, black-cowled, bent double against the storm, leading a rabble of
people. The bell was the sort used to call school children from the playground;
as he walked, he kept ringing it feebly. When his arm tired, he gave it a brief
rest, calling out in a quavering voice: 'Sauve qui peut!' Some of his followers
took up the cry, chanting it like a dirge: one or two paused long enough to
bang on the doors they were passing. From some of the houses muffled figures
crept out to join them. I wondered where they were going; it did not look as if
they would get very far. They were all old and infirm, decrepit. The young and
able-bodied had left them behind. They moved with weak tottering steps in a
slow, shambling procession, their movements unco-ordinated, their faded faces
reddened by the blast.
The girl kept stumbling in the deep snow. I had to half carry her, although I
could hardly breathe. The frost tore my breath away, tried to stop me
breathing; my breath froze in icicles on my collar. The frozen mucous membranes
plugged my nose with ice. Each time I took a mouthful of polar air I coughed
and gasped. It seemed hours before we got to the harbour. She renewed her
feeble struggles at the sight of the boat, cried: 'You can't do this to me. . .
.' I pushed her in, jumped in after her, seized the oars, shoved off, started
rowing with all my might.
Voices screamed after us, but I ignored them; she was my one concern. The open
channel had narrowed considerably, its edges frozen; soon it would be solid
ice. Extraordinary loud, long cracks, like shots, like thunderclaps, came from
the thickening ice of the harbour. My face felt raw, my hands were blue and
burning with cold, but I kept on rowing towards the ship, through the churning
white of the blizzard, through flying spray, booming ice, shrieks, crashes,
blood. A small boat foundered beside us, the water seethed with frantically
lashing limbs. Desperate drowning fingers clawed at the gunwale; I beat them
off. A pair of lovers floated past, locked together by frozen arms, rocking and
rolling deliriously in the waves. Suddenly the boat gave a violent lurch; I
swung round, pulling out my revolver. I knew what had happened. Behind my back
a man had climbed over the side. I fired, thrust him into the water again,
watched it turn red. The ship's side loomed steep as a cliff above us, the
companion-ladder only reached to my shoulder.
Somehow or other, by a colossal effort, I managed to hoist the girl on to the
wooden steps, climbed up after her, pushed her up to the deck. We were allowed
to stay. No one else came aboard. The ship started moving immediately. It was a
triumph.
We travelled on, changing from ship to ship. She could not stand the intense
cold, she shivered continually, broke in pieces like a Venetian glass. The
disintegration could be observed, she grew thinner and paler, more transparent,
ghostlike. It was interesting to watch. She did not move more than was
absolutely essential. Her limbs seemed too brittle for use. The seasons ceased
to exist, replaced by perpetual cold. Ice walls loomed and thundered, smooth,
shining, unearthly, a glacial nightmare; the light of day lost in eerie,
iceberg-glittering mirage-light. With one arm I warmed and supported her: the
other arm was the executioner's.
The cold abated slightly. We went ashore to wait for a different ship. The
country had been at war, the town had suffered severe damage. There was no
accommodation available; only one hotel was being rebuilt, only one floor was
finished, every habitable room occupied. I could not persuade or bribe anybody
to take us in. Travellers were disliked and discouraged: it was natural, in the
circumstances. We were told we could stay at some sort of centre for strangers
outside the town, drove there through the ruined suburbs, everything flattened,
no trace of trees or gardens remaining, nothing left standing upright. The
country beyond had been a battlefield and was now a desert, covered in
shapeless rubbish.
We were deposited at a place which had been a farm. All around was
indescribable chaos. Bits of broken carts, tractors, cars, implements, lay
about, bits of old tyres, bits of unrecognizable tools, all mixed up with the
debris of shattered weapons and war supplies. Our escort walked cautiously,
told us to look out for mines, unexploded bombs. Inside, the rooms were
littered with fragments of all kind of rubbish, too smashed to identify. They
took us to a room with an earth floor and no furniture, holes in the walls,
roof roughly boarded over, when three people sat on the ground, propped against
the wall They were silent, unmoving, hardly seemed alive, took no notice when I
spoke to them. I learnt later that they were deaf their eardrums had burst.
There were many in the same state all over the country, their faces ripped and
lips torn by the same deadly wind. A desperately sick man lay on the floor
under a thin blanket. Great tufts of his hair had fallen out strips of skin
hung from his hands and face, his loose teeth rattled in black bleeding gums
every time he coughed, he never stopped coughing and groaning and spitting
blood Emaciated cats wandered in and out, licked the blood with delicate
pointed pink tongues.
We had to stop there until the ship came. I longed for something to focus my
eyes on, there was nothing inside or out; no fields, houses, or roads; only
vast quantities of stones, rubbish the bones of dead animals. Stones of all
shapes and sizes were spread thick all over the ground to a depth of two or
three feet often piled up in enormous mounds, which took the place of hills in
a normal landscape. I managed to obtain a horse and rode ten miles inland, but
the awful featureless scene did not change, the same derelict stony waste
extended to the horizon in every direction, no sign of life or water. The whole
country seemed stone dead, grey in colour, no hills except hills of stones,
even its natural contours destroyed by war.
The girl was exhausted, worn out by travel: she did not want to go on. She kept
saying that she must rest, begged me to leave her and continue the voyage
alone. 'Don't drag me any further!' Her voice was fretful. 'You only do it to
torture me.' I replied that I was trying to save her. Anger showed in her eyes.
'That's what you say. I was fool enough to believe you the first time.' In
spite of all attempts to please her, she persisted in treating me as a
treacherous enemy. Hitherto I had tried to comfort, to understand. Now her
protracted antagonism had its effect, I followed her into the tiny cabin. She
struggled, there was no room, the boat rolled, she fell from the berth, her
shoulder struck the floor and the soft flesh was hurt. She cried, 'You're a
brute! A beast! I detest you!' tried to hit me, to struggle up; but I forced
her under, forced her to stay down in that hard cold place. She cried out. 'I
wish I could kill you!' began to sob and struggle hysterically. I slapped the
side of her face.
She was afraid of me, but her hostility continued unchanged. Her white,
stubborn, frightened child's face got on my nerves. She was still always cold,
although the days were gradually getting warmer. She refused my coat. I was
obliged to watch her incessant shivering.
She grew emaciated, the flesh seemed to melt off her bones. Her hair lost its
glitter, was too heavy, weighed her head down. She kept her head bent, trying
not to see me. Listless, she hid in corners or, avoiding me, staggered round
the ship, stumbling, her weak legs unable to balance. I no longer felt any
desire, gave up talking to her, adopted the warden's silences as my own. I was
well aware how sinister my wordless exits and entrances must have seemed, and
derived some satisfaction from this.
We were near the end of the journey.


ELEVEN

The gay, undamaged town, full of light and colour, freedom, the absence of
danger, the warm sun. The faces were happy. The sense of escape brought
euphoria. The past was forgotten, the long, hard, dangerous voyage and the
preceding nightmare. Nothing but the nightmare had seemed real while it was
going on, as if the other lost world had been imagined or dreamed. Now that
world, no longer lost, was here the one solid reality. There were theatres,
cinemas, restaurants and hotels, shops where goods of all sorts were sold
freely, without coupons. The contrast was staggering. The relief overwhelming.
The reaction too great. A kind of delirium was induced, a mad gaiety. People
sang and danced in the streets, strangers embraced one another. The whole town
was decorated as for a festival: flowers everywhere, Chinese lanterns and fairy
lights strung from trees, buildings floodlit, elaborate arrangements of
coloured lights in the parks and gardens. The throb of dance music never
stopped. Every night firework displays. All night long fiery stars and rockets
burst in the sky, and sank reflected in the dark harbour. The festivities went
on and on: carnivals, battles of flowers, balls, regattas, concerts,
processions. Nobody wanted to be reminded of what was happening in other parts
of the world. Rumours coming from outside were suppressed by order of the
consul, who had assumed responsibility for the maintenance of law and order,
'pending the restoration of the status quo'. To speak of the catastrophe was an
offence under the new regulations. The rule was to choose not to know.
Remembering how I myself had wished to forget on another occasion, I understood
the euphoric blindness without condoning it. I did not take part in the general
rejoicing; I did not feel gay. I had no wish to spend my time dancing or
looking at fireworks. Very soon I was utterly sick of bands playing and people
in fancy dress. The girl loved all the gaiety, was absolutely transformed by
it, her life miraculously renewed. Her weakness and lassitude vanished, she
rushed to the shops, bought clothes and cosmetics extravagantly, visited
hairdressers, beauty parlours. She seemed a different person. No longer shy,
she made friends with people I did not know, drew confidence from their
approval, became independent and gay. I scarcely saw anything of her; most of
the time I had no idea where she was. She came to me only when she needed
money, which I always gave her. For me it was an unsatisfactory situation. I
wanted to end it.
I could not remain isolated from the rest of the world. I was involved with the
fate of the planet, I had to take an active part in whatever was going on. The
endless celebrations here seemed both boring and sinister, reminiscent of the
orgies of the plague years. Now, as then, people were deluding themselves; they
induced a false sense of security by means of self- indulgence and wishful-
thinking. I did not believe for one moment they had really escaped.
I observed the weather carefully; it was fine and warm, but not warm enough. I
noted particularly how the temperature fell after sunset, producing a definite
chill. It was a bad sign. If I mentioned it, I was told this was the cool
season. All the same, the sun should have had more power. Looking about, I
found other signs of a changing climate. Plants in the tropi- cal gardens were
starting to look unhealthy, and I asked a man working there why this was. He
gave me a suspicious glance, mumbled an evasive answer: when I persisted, he
pretended to hear the head gardener calling, and ran away. I commented on the
chilly evenings to some townspeople I saw going about in peculiar wrappings.
They were obviously unused to even this mild degree of cold, and possessed no
suitable clothing. They too answered evasively and looked at me in alarm. In
view of the new regulations, they probably took me for an agent provocateur.
An acquaintance of mine, employed in an official capacity by his government,
stopped to refuel his plane. I made contact with him, questioned him about
events elsewhere. He was uncommunicative. I understood the reason and did not
press him. He could not be certain of my affiliations. Mistakes were not
tolerated. An absolute standard of loyalty was demanded. The speaker of an
incautious phrase would be eliminated, given no chance to correct an error of
judgement. Somewhat reluctantly, he agreed to take me as a passenger when he
left, but only as far as another island in the archipelago. I saw on the map
that the island inhabited by the Indris was not far away, and, though I had
decided to go back to my old profession, I promised myself a short visit to the
lemurs before proceeding to the theatre of military operations.
I went to inform the girl of my plans. Earlier in the day, waiting to cross a
street, I had been held up while a procession went past. She was at its head,
standing beside the driver of a big open car decorated with parma violets. She
did not see me, she had no reason to look. Her hair shone like pale fire in the
sun, she was smiling and throwing violets to the crowd. It was hard to
recognize her as the girl who had travelled with me. When I entered her room,
she was still wearing the same parma violet dress; the delicate colour suited
her fragile paleness, she looked extremely attractive. Her sparkling hair,
sprinkled with silver and parma violets, had been touched with a matching dye;
the slight touch of fantasy was especially charming.
Telling her to open it later, I presented her with a small package containing a
bracelet she had admired, and a cheque on my personal account. 'I've brought
you some good news, too. I've come to say good-bye.' She looked disconcerted,
asked what I meant. 'I'm leaving tonight. By plane. Aren't you pleased?' As she
only stared silently, I went on: 'You've always wanted to get rid of me. You
must be glad I'm going at last.' A pause, then her voice, cold, resentful.
'What do you expect me to say?' I was puzzled by this reaction. She continued
to survey me coldly, asked with sudden bitterness: 'What sort of a man do you
think you are?' The tone was meant to be scathing. 'Now perhaps you see why
I've never trusted you. I always knew you'd betray me again ... go off and
leave me, just as you did before.' I protested: 'That's grossly unfair! You
can't blame me for going after you've told me to go, made it completely clear
that you've no time for me--I've hardly set eyes on you since we got here.' 'Oh
...!' With a disgusted exclamation, she turned her back, took a few steps away
from me.
The full skirt swirling, a silky shimmer like moonlight on violets; the bright,
heavy hair swinging, scintillating with violet highlights. I followed, touched
her hair with the tips of my fingers, felt it ripple with life. Her arms had a
soft satin sheen, the skin smooth and scented, a chain of violets round the
thin wrist. I put my arms round her and kissed her neck. Instantly her whole
body tensed in violent resistance, she twisted herself away. 'Don't touch me! I
don't know how you have the nerve. . . .' Her voice seemed to fail on the edge
of tears, then rose again thinly: 'Well, what are you waiting for? Why don't
you go? And don't come back this time. I never want to see you again, or be
reminded of you!' She pulled off her watch and a ring I had given her, flung
them wildly in my direction; began trying to unfasten her necklace, hands at
the back of her head, the raised arms giving her slight body a hint of
voluptuousness it did not really possess. With an effort I refrained from
embracing her again, pleaded with her instead. 'Don't be so angry. Don't let's
part like this. You must know how I've felt about you all this time. You know
how I've always followed you, forced you to come with me. But you've said so
consistently that you hated me, wanted nothing to do with me, that I've finally
had to believe you.' I was only being half honest, and knew it. Tentatively I
took her hand; it was stiff, unresponsive, but she did not take it away, let me
go on holding it while she gazed at me fixedly. With doubt, criticism,
accusation her eyes rested . . . serious, innocent, shadowed eyes; the hand
behind her head still engaged with the necklace; the glittering hair, the scent
of violets, close to my hand; then the grave voice. . . . 'And if I hadn't said
those things, would you have stayed with me?'
This time it seemed important to speak the whole truth: but I could not be
certain what that was, and in the end, the only true words seemed to be: 'I
don't know.'
Immediately she became furious, tore her hand out of mine; the other hand
tugged at the chain round her neck, broke it, beads shot all over the room.
'How can you be so utterly heartless--and so brazen about it! Anyone else would
be ashamed . . . but you . . . you don't even pretend to have any feelings . .
. it's too horrible, hateful . . . you simply aren't human at all!' I was
sorry, I had not wanted to hurt her: I could understand her indignation, in a
way. There seemed nothing that I could say. My silence enraged her still more.
'Oh, go on! Go away! Go!' She turned on me suddenly, pushed me with a force for
which I was unprepared, so that I stumbled back, ran my elbow into the door. It
was painful, and I asked in annoyance: 'Why are you so anxious to get me out of
the room? Are you expecting somebody else? The owner of that open car you were
in?' 'Oh, how I loathe and despise you! If only you knew how much!' She pushed
me again. 'Get out, can't you? Go, go, go!' She took a deep breath, lunged at
me, started pounding my chest with her fists. But the effort was too much, she
abandoned it at once and leant against the wall, her head drooping. I saw that
her shadowed face looked bruised by emotion, before the bright hair swung
forward, concealing it. There was a brief pause, long enough for me to feel a
chilly sensation creep over me; the adumbration of emptiness, loss ... of what
life would be like without her.
Action was needed to drive away this unpleasant feeling. I put my hand on the
door knob, and said, 'All right; I'll go now,' half hoping to be detained at
the last moment. She did not move or speak, made no sign. Only, as I opened the
door, a funny little sound escaped from her throat; a sob, a choke, a cough, I
could not tell which. I went out into the passage, walked quickly past all the
closed doors, back to my own room.
There was still a little time left. I rang for a bottle of Scotch and sat
drinking. I felt uncertain, divided in myself. My bag was already packed and
had been taken downstairs. In a few minutes I would have to follow .. . unless
I changed my plans, stayed here after all. ... I remembered that I had not said
goodbye, wondered whether to go back, could not make up my mind. I was still
undecided when it was time to go.
I had to pass her door again on the way down. I hesitated outside it for a
second, then hurried on to the lift. Of course I was leaving. Only a madman
would waste this almost miraculous chance of getting away. I could not possibly
hope for another.


TWELVE

The news I heard during the flight confirmed my worst fears. The world
situation seemed to be entering its last fatal phase. The elimination of many
countries, including my own, left no check on the militarism of the remaining
big powers, who confronted each other, the smaller nations dividing allegiance
between them. Both principals held stocks of nuclear weapons many times in
excess of the overkill stage, so that the balance of terror appeared to be
nicely adjusted. But some of the lesser countries also possessed thermo-nuclear
devices, though which of them was not known: and this uncertainty, and the
resulting tension, provoked escalating crises, each of which brought nearer the
final catastrophe. An insane impatience for death was driving mankind to a
second suicide, even before the full effect of the first had been felt. I was
profoundly depressed, left with a sense of waiting for something frightful to
happen, a sort of mass execution.
I looked at the natural world, and it seemed to share my feelings, to be trying
in vain to escape its approaching doom. The waves of the sea sped in disorderly
flight towards the horizon; the sea birds, the dolphins and flying fish,
hurtled frenziedly through the air; the islands trembled and grew transparent,
endeavouring to detach themselves, to rise as vapour and vanish in space. But
no escape was possible. The defenceless earth could only lie waiting for its
destruction, either by avalanches of ice, or by chain-explosions which would go
on and on, eventually transforming it into a nebula, its very substance
disintegrated.
I went through the jungle alone, searching for the Indris, believing their
magic influence might lift the dead-weight of depression which had fallen on
me. I did not care whether I saw or dreamed them. It was hot, steamy; the mad
intensity of the sun pouring down all its force on the equator for the last
time. My head was aching, I was exhausted: unable to stand the burning sun any
longer, I lay down in black shade, shut my eyes.
At once I felt that the lemurs were near me. Or was it their nearness that
abolished despair and dread? It seemed more as if I received a message of hope
from another world; a world without violence or cruelty, in which despair was
unknown. I had often dreamed of this place, where life was a thousand times
more exciting and splendid than life on earth. Now one of its inhabitants
seemed to stand beside me. He smiled at me, touched my hand, spoke my name. His
face was calm and impartial, timelessly intelligent, full of goodwill,
impossible to associate with any form of pretence.
He told me about the hallucination of space-time, and the joining of past and
future so that either could be the present, and all ages accessible. He said he
would take me to his world, if I wanted to go. He and others like him had seen
the end of our planet, the end of the human race. The race was dying, the
collective death-wish, the fatal impulse to self-destruction, though perhaps
human life might survive. The life here was over. But life was continuing and
expanding in a different place. We could be incorporated in this wider life, if
we chose.
I tried to understand. He was a man, but seemed more; he was not what I was. He
had access to superior knowledge, to some ultimate truth. He was offering me
the freedom of his privileged world, a world my inmost self longed to know. I
felt the excitement of the unimaginable experience. From the doomed dying world
man had ruined, I seemed to catch sigh of this other one, new, infinitely
alive, and of boundless potential. For a second I believed myself capable of
existing on higher level in that wonderful world; but saw how far it was beyond
my powers when I thought of the girl, the warder the spreading ice, the
fighting and killing. I was part of all that, irrevocably involved with events
and persons upon this planet. It was heartbreaking to reject what a part of me
wanted most. But I knew that my place was here, in our work under sentence of
death, and that I would have to stay and see it through to the end.
The dream, the hallucination, or whatever it was, had a powerful effect on me
afterwards. I could not forget it, could not forget the supreme intelligence
and integrity of that dream-face. I was left with a sense of emptiness, loss,
as if something precious really had been in my grasp, and I had thrown it away.
It did not seem to matter what I did now. I was committed to violence and must
keep to my pattern. I managed to react the mainland where guerrilla fighting
was going on, and, indifferent to everything, joined a company of mercenaries
in the pay of the west. We fought in the marshes, in the delta of a tidal river
with many mouths, thigh-deep in mud most of the time. More men had been lost in
the mud than through enemy action when finally we were withdrawn. It seemed to
me we were fighting against the ice, which was all the while coming steadily
nearer, covering more of the world with its dead silence, its awful white
peace. By making war we asserted the fact that we were alive and opposed the
icy death creeping over the globe.
I still felt I was waiting for something fearful to happen, but in a curious
sort of suspended state. There was an emotional blockage. I recognized it in
others besides myself. In suppressing food riots, our machine guns
indiscriminately cut own rioters and harmless pedestrians. I had no feeling
about it and noticed the same indifference in everyone else. People stood
looking on as at a performance, did not even attend to the wounded. I had to
share a sleeping tent with five other men for a time. They had fantastic
courage, but no idea of danger, of life, death, anything; were satisfied as
long as they got a hot meal every day with meat and potatoes. I could not make
any contact with them; hung up my overcoat as a screen and lay sleepless behind
it.
Presently I began to hear the warden mentioned again. He was attached to
western headquarters, held an important post here. I remembered his wish to co-
operate with the big powers, and admired the way he had achieved it. Thinking
of him made me restless. It seemed idiotic to spend my last days in a hired
fighting unit, and I decided to ask him to find me a job in which I would have
more scope. The problem was how to reach him. Our leader was the only person
who occasionally had direct dealings with the higher command, and he refused to
help me, interested in nothing but his own advancement. For days we had been
attacking a strongly- defended building said to contain secret papers. He would
not ask for reinforcements, determined to get the credit for taking the place
unaided. By a simple trick, I enabled him to capture the building and send the
documents to headquarters, for which he was highly praised.
Impressed by my ingenuity, he asked me to have a drink with him, offered me
promotion. He was making a personal report the next day, and I said that the
only reward I wanted was to go to headquarters with him. He replied that he
couldn't spare me, I must give him more of these tips. He was half drunk. I
deliberately encouraged him to go on drinking until he passed out. In the
morning, when he was about to start, I jumped into his car, pretending he had
promised to take me, relying on his having been too drunk the previous night to
remember what had been said. It was a nasty moment. He clearly suspected
something. But he did not have me thrown out of the car. I drove with him to
headquarters, neither of us speaking a word the whole way.


THIRTEEN

They had built their headquarters far away from the battlefields, a large clean
new building, flying a large clean flag. Stone and concrete, it stood out
solid, massive, expensive, indestructible looking, among the low, old, ricketty
wooden houses. Apart from the sentries at the main entrance, it seemed to have
nothing to do with war. No other guards were visible. Inside there appeared to
be no security precautions at all. I recalled the commander's drunken remark:
perhaps these people really were too soft to fight; relying on their
technological supremacy, on the gigantic size and wealth of their country,
believed they need not dirty their hands with the actual fighting, paid their
inferiors to do that.
I was directed to the warden's suite. The place was air-conditioned. Elevators
rose smoothly, silently, swiftly. Thick carpets stretched from wall to wall of
the wide corridors. After the squalid discomfort in which I had been living, it
was like a luxury hotel. Lights blazed everywhere in spite of the sunshine
outside. Windows were hermetically sealed, not made to open. The resulting
atmosphere was slightly unreal.
A woman secretary in uniform told me the warden could see no one. He was
leaving immediately on a tour of inspection and would be away some days. I
said: 'I must see him before he goes. It's urgent. I've come all this way
specially.
I won't keep him a minute.' She pursed her lips, shook her head. 'Absolutely
impossible. He has important papers to sign and gave orders that nobody was to
disturb him.' Her well made-up face was adamant, uncomprehending. It annoyed
me. 'To hell with that! I tell you I must see him! It's a personal matter.
Can't you understand?' I wanted to shake her to get some human expression into
her face. Instead, I made my voice calm. 'At least tell him I'm here and ask
whether he'll see me.' I felt in my pockets for some means of identification,
then wrote my name on a pad. While I was doing so a colonel came in. The
secretary went over and whispered to him. At the end of their confabulation the
man said he would give the message himself, took the paper with my name on it
and left the room by the same door through which he had just entered. I knew he
had no intention of telling the warden about me. Only decisive action on my
part would get me a interview. Soon it would be too late.
'Where does that door lead?' I asked the secretary, pointing to one at the
other end of the room. 'Oh, that's strictly private. You can't go in there.
It's forbidden.' For the first time she began to lose her superior calm and to
look flustered. She had not been trained to deal with a direct approach. I
said: 'Well I'm going in,' moved towards the door. 'No!' She flew to stand in
front of it, barring my way. The country she belonged to was so firmly
convinced of world power that its nationals could not conceive of real
opposition from anyone, even over the smallest issue. I smiled, pushed her
aside. She clung on to my clothes, holding me back. There was a brief scuffle.
I heard a voice I recognized beyond the closed door. 'What's going on there?' I
went in. 'Oh, it's you, is it?' He seemed singular! unsurprised. In the doorway
the secretary was talking fast and apologetically. He waved her away. The door
shut. I said: 'I must speak to you.'
We were alone in the rich room. Persian rugs on the parquet floor, period
furniture, on the wall a full length portrait of him by a well-known painter.
My worn, shabby, unpressed uniform emphasized, by contrast, the elegant
grandeur of his, which had gold emblems on cuffs and shoulders, and, on the
chest, the ribbons of various orders. He stood up; I had not remembered him as
being so tall. The touch of the grand manner he had always had was more marked
than when I last saw him. I was not at ease. His presence affected me in the
usual way; but, with such obvious differences between us, the idea of contact,
however obscure, seemed inappropriate and embarrassing. When he said coldly,
'It's no use forcing your way in here. I'm just leaving,' I felt confused, and
could only repeat: 'I must speak to you first.' 'Impossible. I'm late as it
is.' He glanced at his watch, started towards the door. 'Surely you can wait
just a moment!' In my anxiety, I hurriedly stepped in front of him. I should
have known better. His eyes flashed; he was angry; I had thrown away my one
chance. I cursed myself for a fool. Perhaps my downcast expression amused him:
at all events, his attitude suddenly seemed to change, he half smiled. 'I can't
hold up the entire war just to talk to you. If there's something you must say,
you'll have to come with me.' I was delighted. This was better than anything I
had expected. 'May I? That's wonderful!' I thanked him enthusiastically. He
burst out laughing.
The road to the airfield was lined with people waiting to catch a glimpse of
him as we drove past. They stood six deep at the roadside, watched from
gardens, windows, balconies, roofs, trees, hoardings, telegraph poles. Some of
them must have waited a long time. I was impressed by the force of his
immediate impact on the crowd.
Sitting beside him in the plane, I was conscious of curious glances from its
other occupants. It was strange to look down and see the earth, not flat or
gently curved, but as a segment of a round ball, the sea light blue, the land
yellowish-green. Overhead it was dark blue night. Drinks were brought, I was
handed a tinkling glass. 'Ice! What luxury!' He glanced my dilapidated uniform,
made a grimace. 'You can't expect luxury if you insist on being a hero.' The
words were mocking, but the smile had some degree of charm. He might even have
been taking a friendly interest. 'May I ask why you have suddenly become one of
our heroic fighters?' I knew I should have spoken about a job. Instead, for
some reason, told him I'd had to do something drastic to cure my depression.
'Funny sort of cure. More likely to kill you.' 'Perhaps that's what I wanted.'
'No, you're not the suicide type. Anyway, why bother, when we're all going to
be killed next week.' 'As soon as that?' 'Well, perhaps not literally. But
certainly very soon.' I recognized the trick of blinking his eyes, making the
bright blue pupils flash as if they reflected a dazzling blue light. It was the
sign that something had not been said. Of course, he had secret information. He
always knew everything before anyone else.
An enormous dinner was served. It seemed altogether too lavish, I could not eat
half of it. I had got out of the way of eating big meals. Afterwards I tried
again to say what I had come to say, but the sentences would not take shape in
my head. I found myself thinking of him, and remarked on how little surprise he
had shown over my arrival. 'I was almost expecting you.' His expression was
rather odd. 'You have a way of turning up just before things happen.' He seemed
to speak quite seriously. 'You really expect the catastrophe within weeks or
days?' 'Looks like it.'
Blinds were drawn, shutting out the sky. A film was to be shown. He muttered in
my ear: 'Wait till their attention's fixed on the screen. Then I'll show you
something more interesting. It's supposed to be kept secret.' I waited,
curious. We left our seats quietly, went through a door, faced an uncovered
window. I was confused about time. It had been night overhead all along, but
below it was still daylight. There were no clouds. I saw islands scattered over
the sea, a normal aerial view. Then something extraordinary, out of this world:
a wall of rainbow ice jutting up from the sea, cutting right across, pushing a
ridge of water ahead of it as it moved, as if the flat pale surface of sea was
a carpet being rolled up. It was a sinister, fascinating sight, which did not
seem intended for human eyes. I stared down at it, seeing other things at the
same time. The ice world spreading over our world. Mountainous walls of ice
surrounding the girl. Her moonwhite skin, her hair sparkling with diamond
prisms under the moon. The moon's dead eye watching the death of our world.
When we left the plane we were in a remote country, a town I did not know. The
warden had come to attend an important conference, people were waiting for him,
all sorts of urgent affairs. I was flattered because he seemed in no hurry to
leave me. He said: 'You should have a look round, it's an interesting place.'
The town had only lately changed hands, and I asked if the troops had not done
a lot of damage; received the reply: 'Don't forget some of us are civilized
people.'
In his splendid uniform he strolled beside me in beautifully- kept gardens,
attended by armed guards in black and gold. I was proud to be with him. He was
a fine-looking man who kept himself in every way at the height of his powers,
all his muscles exercised like an athlete's, his intellect and his senses
deliberately sharpened. He radiated tremendous dominance, besides an intense
physical vitality, zest for living. His aura of power and success seemed to
fill the surrounding air, and even extend to me. Walking past artificial
cascades, we came to a lily pool where the stream widened. Giant willowtrees
trailed long green hair in the water, made an inviting grotto of cool green
shade. We sat on a stone seat, watched a kingfisher tracing jewelled parabolas.
Motionless grey shadows, herons stood here and there in the shallows. It was a
private, peaceful idyllic scene; violence was worlds away. I thought, but did
not say, that it seemed a pity people were not allowed to enjoy all this
tranquil beauty. As if he read my mind, he told me: 'The public used to be
admitted on certain days. But we had to suspend the practice on account of
vandalism. Hooligans did the damage the armies refrained from doing. There are
people you can't teach to appreciate beauty. They're subhuman.'
On the far side of the river a troop of small gazelle-like creatures had come
to drink, lifting and lowering graceful horned heads. The guards stood at a
distance. Alone with my companion, I felt closer to him than ever before; we
were like brothers, like identical twin brothers. Drawn to him more strongly
than I had ever been, I had to give my feelings some expression, told him how
much I appreciated his kindness how greatly I was honoured to be his friend.
Something was wrong. He did not smile or acknowledge the compliment, but
abruptly stood up. I got up too, while across the water the animals fled,
alarmed by our movements. The atmosphere was changing round me; suddenly there
was a chill, as if the warm air had passed over ice. I felt a sudden
uncomprehended terror, like the sensation that comes in nightmares just before
one begins to fall.
In a moment he had turned on me, his eyes flashing blue danger, his face a grim
mask. 'Where is she?' His voice was fierce, curt, icy. It was as if he had
whipped out a gun and pointed it at me. I was horrified; confused by the sudden
switch from one emotion to another totally different, I could only stammer
stupidly: 'I suppose where I left her. . . .' He gave me a look of ice. 'You
mean you don't know?' His accusatory tone froze. I was too appalled to reply.
The guards came closer, formed a circle round us. To shade their eyes, prevent
recognition, or inspire dread, they wore as part of their uniform black plastic
visors which covered the upper part of the face so that they looked masked. I
vaguely remembered hearing about their toughness, that they were convicted
thugs and murderers, whose sentences had been remitted in exchange for their
absolute loyalty to his person.
'So you've abandoned her.' Arrows of blue ice piercing a blizzard, his eyes
narrowed and struck. 'I hardly expected that, even of you.' The abysmal
contempt in his voice made me wince and mutter: 'You know she's always been
hostile. She sent me away.' 'You don't know how to handle her,' he stated
coldly. 'I'd have licked her into shape. She only needs training. She has to be
taught toughness, in life and in bed.' I could not speak, could not collect
myself: I was in a state of shock. When he asked, 'What do you propose to do
about her?' I found nothing to say. His eyes were watching me all the time with
a frigid scorn and remoteness that was too painful, too humiliating. Their blue
blaze seemed to stop me thinking. 'I shall take her back then.' In half-a-dozen
dry words he disposed of her future, she had no say in the matter.
At that moment I was more concerned with him, linked to aim so closely, as if
we shared the same blood. I could not bear to be alienated from him. 'Why are
you so angry?' I went a step closer, tried to touch his sleeve, but he moved
out of my reach. 'Is it only because of her?' I could not believe this, the
bond between him and myself seemed so strong. Just then she was nothing to me
by comparison, not even real. We could have shared her between us. I may have
said something of the kind. His face was carved in stone, his cold voice hard
enough to cut steel, he was thousands of miles away. 'As soon as I can make
time I shall go and fetch her. And then keep her with me. You won't see her
again.'
There was no bond, never had been, except in my imagination. He was not my
friend, had never been close to me, identification was nothing but an illusion.
He was treating me as someone beneath contempt. In a feeble attempt to re-
establish myself, I said I had tried to save her. His eyes went terribly hard
and blue, I could hardly meet them. His face was a statue's, stony, it did not
change. I forced myself to go on looking him in the face. Only his mouth
finally moved to say, 'She will be saved, if that's possible. But not by you.'
Then he turned and strolled off in his grand uniform with gold epaulettes. A
few paces away he paused, lit a cigarette keeping his back towards me, strolled
on again without giving me a glance. I saw him lift one hand and make a sign to
the guards.
They closed in, inhuman in their black masks. Rubber truncheons crashed into
me, I was kicked in the groin, in falling my head must have struck the stone
seat, I passed out. This was lucky for me. Apparently it did not amuse them to
beat an unconscious body. There was no sign of them when I came round. My head
throbbed and rang, even to open my eyes was a fearful effort, every inch of my
body ached, but nothing was broken. Pain confused me, made me uncertain of what
had happened, of the length of time that had elapsed of the sequence of events.
In my confusion I could not understand being let off so lightly, until it
occurred to me that the guards meant to come back later to finish the job. If
they found me here I was done for. I could hardly move, but with infinite
labour, dragged myself down to the river, everything swaying round me, fell
among rushes and lay for some time with my face in the mud.
When a far off sound roused me it was almost dark. In the distance a semicircle
of dark shapes was slowly advancing, as if searching. I got a fright, I thought
they were people looking for me and kept quite motionless. They must have been
animals grazing, for when I next looked up they had gone. The shock made me
realize that I had to get moving. I crawled on to the water's edge, let the
river run over the wound in my head, washed another deep gash on my cheekbone,
washed off some of the blood and mud.
The cold water revived me. Somehow or other I managed to reach the park gates,
even started walking along a street, but collapsed after a short distance. A
carload of noisy young people coming back from a celebration saw me lying in
the road and stopped to investigate. They thought I was one of their party who
had fallen down drunk. I persuaded them to drive me to the hospital, where a
doctor attended to me. I invented some story to account for my injuries and was
given a bed in the casualty department. I slept for two or three hours. The
clanging bell of an ambulance woke me. Stretcher- bearers came tramping in. To
move was appallingly difficult, all I wanted was to lie still and go on
sleeping. But I knew it was too dangerous, I dared not stay any longer.
While the night staff were occupied with the new arrival, I crept through a
side door into a dark corridor and left the building.


FOURTEEN

My head was aching, everything was confused inside it. I knew only that I had
to get out of the town before daylight. I could not think. The hallucination of
one moment did not fit the reality of the next. In a narrow alley, a car came
tearing towards me to run me down, filling the whole space between alp-high
houses. With bleeding knuckles I staggered from door to locked door, at the
last moment crushed myself up against one. In uniform, immensely grand, the
warden drove past in his great black car. The girl was with him, her hair
shimmering violet like the shadows of trees on snow. They drove through the
snow together under a white fur rug, wide as a room, deep as a snowdrift, edged
with cabuchon rubies.
Lit by the dazzling cold fire of the aurora borealis, they walked among
glittering icebergs; a blizzard blew arctic white, his bone-white forehead and
icicle eyes, her silver-frosted hair bright with ice flowers under the pole
star. A thunderclap boomed in the ice. He fought a polar bear, strangled it
with his hands, to train her in toughness taught her to take the skin with his
wicked knife. When it was done, she crept close for warmth. The huge skin
covered them both, its long white hairs tipped with blood. The snowy thickness
hid their two bodies; blood dripping from the tips of the dense fur turned the
snow blood-red.
I saw her standing in torchlight with dreaming eyes. I watched her, wanted her,
wanted to take her away with me. But that other had claimed her; her white
girl's body fell through the smoke of smouldering torches across his knees. I
was out searching for her, marauders were sacking the town. I searched
everywhere, could not find her, stumbled over her in the rubble, her head awry.
Through the smoke and dust filling the air, I saw her skin white against dirt
and debris, the blood first red and then black on the white, her head twisted
sideways by the unbelievable hair, the slender neck broken. Victimization in
childhood had made her accept the fate of a victim, and whatever I did or did
not do, this fate would ultimately achieve itself. To leave her to it was one
thing. To leave her to that man was quite a different thing. It was something I
could not do.
I had to get to her before he did. But the difficulties were overwhelming. The
total absence of transport meant resorting to bribery, every kind of deception,
worse. In my mind's I eye kept seeing the iceline moving across the ocean,
towards the islands, towards that particular island I had not identified on the
map. I thought of her at the centre, not knowing she was encircled, while we
advanced towards her from different sides, me from one point, he from another,
and then the ice. . . . My chances of arriving first seemed almost non-
existent. Every mile would be slow and difficult for me. He could get to her by
plane in just a few hours, whenever he felt inclined. I could only hope for the
important conference he was now attending and other military matters to detain
him as long as possible. But I was not optimistic.
My head wound and slashed face had begun to heal normally, but I did not feel
normal. My head ached all the time, I was pursued by horrific visions,
disasters exploding in violent death, universal destruction. I was always aware
that I was going to execution. Not that my own death seemed to matter. I had
lived, I had done things, I had seen the world. I did not want to grow old,
deteriorate, lose my intelligence and my physical faculties. But I had this
compulsive urge to see the girl once more; to be the first to reach her.
I had to travel an enormous distance. Because I could not risk crossing the
frontier openly, for two days I went on foot through wild country, without
shelter, without food or drink. Later I had the luck to be taken some of the
way by helicopter.  A naked woman, life size, was painted on the side in crude
colours; pop art in the midst of war. A person in occupation had to be disposed
of; I was not going to lose the chance of a lift. The luck did not last. In a
frenzy I searched the wreckage for the man who had been shot down. Only the
painted face simpered at me among the debris, round pink circles for cheeks,
black eyes blankly serene as a painted doll's.
In a country at war I tried to keep away from the fighting. I came to a town
unexpectedly quiet, except for the lorries that thundered through, crammed with
troops or workers. A dull grey day and a dull grey town, sickly women languidly
slapping their dirty washing on flat river stones. I was worn out and started
to lose heart. Without some form of transport I would never complete my
journey. I saw nothing encouraging here. Passers-by averted their eyes when I
looked at them they were suspicious of strangers, and with my scarred face my
old torn muddy guerrilla's outfit, my appearance could not have been
reassuring. I went about searching for someone who looked approachable, found
no such person. I talked to the owner of a garage, offered him money, a new
foreign rifle with telescopic sights; he threatened to call the police, would
do nothing to help me.
At dusk it began to rain, rained harder as night came on. A curfew was in
force: no light showed from the houses, the streets were empty. I was taking a
risk by staying outside, but was too despondent to care. A siren howled,
distant crashes, gradually coming nearer, followed at intervals, alternating
with bursts of gunfire. Rain fell in sheets, the street had become a river. I
sheltered under an archway, shivered, could not think what to do; my brain
seemed paralyzed by discomfort. I felt desperate, in despair.
A big military car swished past, stopped on the opposite side of the road.
Impregnable in steel helmet, overcoat and high boots, the driver got out and
went into a house. The desultory bombardment was still going on. There was no
need for silence. In desperation, I prised up one of the granite cobbles,
hurled it through a groundfloor window, put my hand in, pushed up the glass,
swung myself over the sill. Before my feet touched the floor, the door of the
room opened, I faced the man from the car. A sudden much louder explosion
rocked everything, filled the dark room with a fiery blaze, reflected on
cheekbones, eyeballs. Blood gushed from the wound, ran in dark rivers I tried
to check, while I dragged off his uniform, put it on, forced him into my
tattered clothes. By good luck we were about the same size. I went round
hurriedly, wrecking the room, threw the furniture about, smashed mirrors,
opened drawers, ripped pictures with my knife, to make it look as if a looter
had broken in and been shot by the householder. I could not stand the weight of
the metal helmet on my head. Carrying it in my hand, I went out, dressed as the
other man, got into the armoured car, drove away. I had not succeeded in
keeping his blood off the uniform, but with the fur-lined coat fastened the
stains did not show.
I was stopped at a checkpoint on the outskirts. A bomb obligingly dropped near
by. There was chaos, the guards had no time to interrogate me. I bluffed my way
through and drove on. I knew I had not satisfied them, that they suspected
something; but I thought they were too busy to worry about me. I was wrong. I
had only gone a few miles when searchlights spotlit the car, I heard the roar
of supercharged motorcycles behind me. One rider hurtled past, ordering me to
stop. Just ahead, he braked hard, stayed straddled in the middle of the road,
suicidal, his gun pointed at me, spitting bullets which bounced off like
hailstones. I put on speed, hit him squarely, glanced back, saw a black shape
fly over handlebars and another crash down, as the next two machines skidded
into the wreck and piled up. The shooting went on for a bit, but no one came
after me. I hoped the survivors would stay to clean up the mess and give me
time to get right away. The rain stopped, warlike noises died out, I began to
relax. Then my headlights caught figures in uniform hurrying off the road,
patrol cars blocking it, parked right across. Somebody must have telephoned on
ahead. I wondered why they thought me important enough to send out all these
people; decided they must already have found the man who should have been
driving, and that the importance was his. They started firing. I accelerated,
vaguely recalling the warden's story of crashing a frontier barrier, as the car
burst through the obstruction like tissue paper. More shots followed
harmlessly. Soon all was quiet, I had the road to myself, no further sign of
pursuit When I crossed the border half-an-hour afterwards, I knew I was clear
at last.
The chase had a bracing effect on me. Singlehanded I had defeated the organized
force which had been used against me. I was stimulated, as if I had won a fast
and exciting game. At last I felt normal again, my old self, no longer a
despairing traveller in need of help, but strong, independent, powerful. The
mechanical power I controlled had become my own. I stopped to examine the car.
Except for a few dents and scratches it was none the worse. The tank was still
three-quarters full, the back packed with numerous cans of petrol, far more
than I needed to get to my destination. I discovered a large package of food:
biscuits, cheese, eggs, chocolate, apples, a bottle of rum. I should not have
to bother about stopping to get supplies.
Suddenly I was on the last lap of the journey. In spite of difficulties which
had seemed insurmountable, my objective was almost in sight. I was pleased with
my achievement, and with myself. I did not think about the killing involved. If
I had acted differently I should never have got here. In any case, the hour of
death had only been anticipated slightly, every living creature would soon
perish. The whole world was turning towards death. Already the ice had buried
millions; the survivors distracted themselves with fighting and rushing about,
but always knew the invincible enemy was advancing, and that wherever they
went, the ice would be there, the conqueror, in the end. The only thing was to
extract what satisfaction one could from each moment. I enjoyed rushing through
the night in the high-powered car, exhilarated by the speed and my own skilful
driving, by the feeling of excitement and danger. When I got tired I pulled up
at the roadside, slept for an hour or so.
The cold woke me at dawn. All night long freezing stars had bombarded the earth
with ice-rays, which penetrated its surface and were stored beneath, leaving
only a thin crust over a reservoir of ice cold. In this sub-tropical region, to
see the ground white with rime and feel it frozen hard underfoot gave the
impression of having stepped out of everyday life, into a field of strangeness
where no known laws operated. I ate a quick breakfast, put the engine in gear,
and sped towards the horizon, towards the sea. On a good road, I drove fast, at
ninety miles an hour, flying over the desolate land, at long intervals passing
the remains of a house or a village. Although I never saw anyone, I could feel
eyes watching me from the ruins. People saw the army car and kept quiet, did
not reveal themselves; they had learnt that it was safer to remain hidden.
The day got colder as it went on, the sky darkened. Rising beyond the mountains
behind me, ominous masses of black cloud were converging upon the sea. I
watched these clouds, understood their meaning; felt the intensifying cold with
increasing dread. I knew it meant only one thing: the glaciers were closing in.
Instead of my world, there would soon be only ice, snow, stillness, death; no
more violence, no war, no victims; nothing but frozen silence, absence of life.
The ultimate achievement of mankind would be, not just self-destruction, but
the destruction of all life; the transformation of the living world into a dead
planet.
In a sky which should have been cloudless and burning blue the sombre, enormous
structures of storm cloud looked inexpressibly sinister, threatening, like
monstrous ruins on the point of collapse, hanging impossibly overhead. Icy
crystalline shapes began to flower on the windscreen. I was oppressed by the
sense of universal strangeness, by the chill of approaching catastrophe, the
menace of ruins suspended above; and also by the enormity of what had been
done, the weight of collective guilt. A frightful crime had been committed,
against nature, against the universe, against life. By rejecting life, man had
destroyed the immemorial order, destroyed the world, now everything was about
to crash down in ruins.
A gull flew close and cried; I had reached the sea. I sniffed the salt smell,
looked over the dark waves to the horizon, saw no wall of ice. But the air was
full of the deadly coldness of ice, it could not be far away. I raced across
fifty miles of bare land to the town. Above it, the clouds hung lower, blacker,
more ominous, waiting for me to arrive. The cold made me shiver perhaps he had
already been there. When I slowed down and entered the streets where people had
danced all night, I could hardly believe this was the same gay place. The
streets were all deserted and silent; no pedestrians, no traffic, no flowers,
no music, no lights. I saw sunken ships in the harbour; demolished buildings,
closed shops and hotels; a cold grey light that belonged to another climate, a
different part of the world; everywhere the imminent threat of a new ice age.
I saw what was in front of my eyes, and at the same time I saw the girl. Her
picture was always with me, in my wallet and in my head. Now her image appeared
in the open wherever I looked. Her white lost face was everywhere with its too-
large eyes, her albino paleness flared like a torch beneath the malignant
clouds, drew my eyes like a magnet. She was a shimmer among the ruins, her hair
a glittering in the dark day. Her wide eyes of a wronged and terrified child
accused me from the black holes of smashed windows. Like a perverted child she
ran past, soliciting me with big eyes, tempting me with the pleasure of
watching her pain, elaborating the worst imaginings of my desire. The ghostly
gleam of her face lured me into the shadows, her hair was a cloud of light; but
as I came near her she turned and fled, the silver shifting suddenly on her
shoulders, a waterfall glinting in moonlight.
The remains of a roadblock obstructed the entrance to the hotel at which we had
stayed. I had to leave the car and walk up the drive. A strong wind, cruelly
cold, blew straight off the ice, tore my breath away. I kept glancing at the
anthracite-coloured sea to make sure the ice itself was not already in sight.
At ground level the exterior of the hotel was unchanged, but higher up the
walls were full of great gaping holes, the roof sagged. I went inside. It was
cold and dark, no heating, no light, dilapidated chairs and tables arranged as
in a café. In spite of fragments of gilt decoration surviving amidst the
destruction, I did not recognize the wrecked room.
I heard uneven steps, the tap of a stick, was approached by someone who knew my
name. The young man's appearance was vaguely familiar, but at first I could not
place him in the dim light. Suddenly it came back to me while we were shaking
hands. 'Of course, you're the proprietor's son.' The lameness was new and had
put me off. He nodded. 'My parents are dead. Killed in the bombing. Officially
I'm dead too.' I asked what had happened. He grimaced, touched his leg. 'It was
in the retreat. All the wounded were left behind. When I heard I'd been
reported killed I didn't bother to contradict. . . .' He broke off, gave me a
nervous glance. 'But what on earth brings you back? You can't stay here, you
know. We're in the area of immediate danger. Everyone's been told to get out.
There are only a few of us old inhabitants left.'
I looked at him; did not understand why he was uneasy with me. He told me the
crowds of people I had seen here had left long ago. 'They almost all got away
before war broke out.' I said I had come in the hope of finding the girl. 'But
I ought to have realized that she would have gone.' I waited for him to say
something about the warden. Instead, he looked awkward, hesitated before he
spoke. 'As a matter of fact, she's one of the very few who did not go.' My
emotions had been disturbed during the last few seconds; to disguise the fact
as much as to make sure my present relief was justified, I asked if any
inquiries had been made about her. 'No.' He looked blank, seemed to be speaking
the truth. 'Does she still live here?' Again the reply was 'No'. He went on:
'We've been using this part as a restaurant, but the whole building's unsafe.
There's nobody left to do repair work. Anyhow, what's the use?' I agreed that
the approach of the ice made all such activities futile. But I was only
interested in the girl. 'Where is she living now?' His hesitation was longer
this time, more marked. He was obviously embarrassed by the question, and when
he finally answered it, I at once saw why. 'Quite near, At the beach house.' I
stared at him. 'I see.' Everything was clear now. I remembered the house well,
it was his home, where he had lived with his parents. He continued
uncomfortably: 'It's convenient for her. She's been doing some work here.'
'Really? What sort of work?' I was curious. 'Oh, helping in the restaurant.' He
sounded evasive, vague. 'Do you mean waiting on people?' 'Well, she sometimes
dances. . . .' As if to avoid the topic, he said: 'It's a great pity she didn't
go to a safe place like everyone else, while it was still possible. She had
friends who would have taken her with them.' I replied: 'Evidently she had
friends here she preferred to stay with.' I watched him closely, but his face
was in shadow, his back to the fading light, I could not make out his
expression.
All at once I became impatient. I had already wasted too much time on him. She
was the one I had to talk to. On my way to the door I asked: 'Have you any idea
where I'd be likely to find her?' 'I should think she'd be in her room. She's
not due here till later.' He limped after me, leaning on the stick. 'I'll show
you a short cut through the garden.' I got the impression he was trying to
delay me. 'Many thanks: but I can find my own way.' I opened the door and went
out; shut it between us before he had time to say anything more.


FIFTEEN

An ice-cold air-stream hit me outside. Dusk was falling, the wind brought
crumblings of frozen snow. I did not look for the short cut, but took a path I
knew led down to the beach. Frost had killed off the exotic plants I remembered
growing beside it: the leaves of palm trees were shrivelled, moribund,
blackened, furled tight like rolled umbrellas. I should have been inured to
climatic changes; but I again felt I had moved out of ordinary life into an
area of total strangeness All this was real, it was really happening, but with
a quality of the unreal; it was reality happening in quite a different way.
Snow began to fall steadily, driven into my face by the arctic wind. The cold
scorched my skin, froze my breath. To keep the snow out of my eyes I put on the
heavy helmet. By the time the beach came in sight, a thick crust of ice had
formed on the brim, making it still heavier. Through the white shifting curtain
the house dimly appeared ahead; but I could not make out whether waves or a
huge uneven expanse of pack ice lay beyond. It was heavy going against the
wind. The snow thickened, inexhaustibly falling, incessantly sifting down
spreading a sheet of sterile whiteness over the face of the dying world,
burying the violent and their victims together in a mass-grave, obliterating
the last trace of man and his works.
Suddenly, through the churning white, I saw the girl running away from me,
towards the ice. I tried to shout, 'Stop! Come back!' but the polar air
corroded my throat, my voice was whirled away by the wind. Snow powder blowing
round me like mist, I ran after her. I could hardly see her, hardly see out of
my eyes: I had to pause, painfully wipe away the crystals of ice forming on my
eyeballs, before I could continue. The murderous wind kept hurling me back, the
snow heaped up white hills that fumed like volcanoes, blinding me again with
white smoke. In the awful dead cold I lurched on, staggered and stumbled,
slipped, fell, struggled up, reached her somehow at last, clutched her with
numbed hands.
I was too late, I saw at once that we had no chance. A mirage-like arctic
splendour towered all around, a weird, unearthly architecture of ice. Huge ice-
battlements, rainbow turrets and pinnacles, filled the sky, lit from within by
frigid mineral fires. We were trapped by those encircling walls, a ring of
ghostly executioners, advancing slowly, inexorably, to destroy us. I could not
move, could not think. The executioner's breath paralyzed, dulled the brain. I
felt the fatal chill of the ice touch me, heard its thunder, saw it split by
dazzling emerald fissures. Far overhead the iceberg-glittering heights boomed
and shuddered, about to fall. Frost glimmered on her shoulders, her face was
ice-white, the long eyelashes swept her cheek. I held her close, clasped her
tightly against my chest, so that she should not see the mountainous masses of
falling ice.
In her grey loden coat, she stood on the verandah surrounding the beach house,
waiting for someone. At first I thought she had seen me coming, then realized
that her eyes were fixed on a different path. I stopped and stood watching. I
wanted to make sure who it was she expected, though I did not think the hotel
man was likely to come now, knowing I would be here. She seemed to feel she was
no longer alone, started looking about, and finally saw me. I was not close
enough to distinguish the dilating pupils that made her eyes huge and black in
her white face. But I heard her sharp exclamation, saw the hair swirl and glint
as she swung round, pulled the hood over her head, and started towards the
beach I could hardly see her once she was off the verandah. She was trying to
become invisible in the snow. Sudden terror had seized her: the thought of the
man whose ice-blue eyes had a magnetic power which could deprive her of will
and thrust her down into hallucination and horror. The fear she lived with,
always near her, close behind the world's normal façade, had become
concentrated on him. And there was another connected with him, they were in
league together, or perhaps they were the same person.
Both of them persecuted her, she did not understand why But she accepted the
fact as she accepted all the things that happened to her, expecting to be ill-
treated, to be made a victim, ultimately to be destroyed, either by unknown
forces or by human beings. This fate seemed always to have been waiting for
her, ever since time began. Only love might have saved her from it. But she had
never looked for love. Her part was to suffer; that was known and accepted.
Fatality brought resignation. It was no use fighting against her fate. She knew
she had been beaten before the start.
She had gone only a few steps when I overtook her and pulled her back to the
shelter of the verandah. Wiping the snow off her face, she exclaimed, 'Oh, it's
you,' stared at me in surprise. 'Who did you think it was?' I remembered the
uniform I was wearing. 'These clothes aren't mine, by the way. I borrowed
them.' Her apprehension vanished, she showed relief, her manner became quite
different, suddenly she seemed self-possessed. I was familiar with the air of
confidence and independence she could assume when people or circumstances made
her feel secure. The young man at the hotel must have done this. 'Let's go in
quickly. Why are we standing here?' She spoke casually, acted as though my
return had been planted and expected, pretending there was nothing unusual
about the situation. It was annoying, after all I had been through. I knew it
was meant to make me feel small.
She led the way to her door, invited me in with a social gesture. The little
room was bare and cold, an old-fashioned oil heater barely took off the chill.
But everything was clean and tidy, I saw that affectionate care had been
expended, here were decorations of driftwood and shells from the beach. I'm
afraid it's not very comfortable; not up to your standard.' she was trying to
make fun of me. I said nothing. She undid her coat and put back the hood,
shaking her hair free. It had grown longer, sparkled and shimmered with life.
Under the coat she was wearing an expensive looking grey suit I had not seen,
which had evidently been made to measure. So she had not been short of money.
To see her looking attractive and well-dressed for some reason added to my
annoyance.
Like a conventional hostess making conversation, she said: 'It's nice to have a
place of one's own after so much travelling about.' I stared at her. I had come
so far to find her, through so many deaths and dangers and difficulties: now at
last I had reached her; and she was talking to me like a stranger. It was too
much. I felt hurt and resentful. Exasperated by her offhand pose and her
determination to deprive my arrival of its importance, I said indignantly: 'Why
are you putting on this act? I didn't come all this way just to be treated as a
casual caller.'
'Did you expect me to put out the red carpet for you?' The feeble flippant
retort sounded offensive. I was becoming angry, knew I would not be able to
control myself much longer.
When, still keeping up the farce, she inquired in the same artificial tone what
I had been doing, I answered coldly: 'I've been with someone you know,' giving
her a long, hard, meaning look at the same time. She understood at once,
dropped her affectations and showed signs of anxiety. 'When I first saw you ...
I thought you ... he ... I was afraid he'd arrived here.' 'He will be here at
any moment. I came to tell you that. To warn you, in case you have other plans,
that he means to get you back--' She interrupted, 'No, no--never!' shaking her
head so vigorously that the hair flew out with a sheen like spray. I said:
'Then you must leave immediately. Before he comes.'
'Leave here?' It was cruel. She looked round in dismay at the home she had
made. The sea shells comforted, the little room was so reassuring, so safe, the
one place on earth she could call her own. 'But why? He'll never find me. . .
.' Her wistful, pleading voice did not touch me; mine remained adamant, cold.
'Why not? I found you.' 'Yes, but you knew. . . . ' She looked at me with
suspicion, I was not to be trusted. 'You didn't tell him, did you?' 'Of course
not. I want you to come with me.'
All of a sudden her confidence was restored, she reverted to her former
disparaging attitude, gave me a derisive glance 'With you? Oh, no! Surely we
haven't got to go through all that again!' Attempting sarcasm, she rolled her
big eyes turned them up to the ceiling. It was a deliberate insult. I was
outraged. Her slighting tone belittled my desperate effort to reach her,
ridiculed everything I had endured. In a furious rage suddenly, I took hold of
her roughly, gave her a violent shake. 'Stop it, will you! I can't stand any
more! Stop being so damned insulting! I've just been through hell for your sake
travelled hundreds of miles under ghastly conditions, run fantastic risks,
almost got myself killed. And not the slightest sign of appreciation from you .
. . not one word of thanks at the end of it .. . you don't even treat me with
ordinary common politeness. ... I only get a cheap sneer. . . . Charming
gratitude! Charming way to behave!' She was gazing at me speechlessly, her eyes
all black pupil. My rage did not become any less. 'Even now you haven't got the
decency to apologize!'
Still infuriated, I went on abusing her, called her insufferable, impertinent,
insolent, vulgar. 'In future you might at least be civil enough to thank people
who do things for you, instead of displaying your stupid conceited rudeness by
laughing at them!' She seemed stricken, dumb; stood before me in silence, with
hanging head, all trace of assurance gone. In the last few moments she had
become a withdrawn, frightened, unhappy child, damaged by adult deviations.
A pulse at the base of her neck caught my eye, beating rapidly like something
under the skin trying to escape. I had noticed it on other occasions when she
was frightened. It had its usual effect on me now. I said loudly: 'What a fool
I've been to worry about you. I suppose you moved in with your boy friend as
soon as I left.' She looked up at me quickly, apprehensively, stammered: 'What
do you mean?' 'Oh, don't pretend you don't understand--it's too sickening!' My
voice sounded aggressive, got louder and louder. 'I mean the owner of this
house, of course. The fellow you're living with. The one you were waiting for
on the verandah when I arrived.' I could hear myself shouting. The noise
terrified her. She had begun to tremble, her mouth was shaking. 'I was not
waiting for him--' She saw what I was doing, broke off. 'Don't lock the door. .
. .' I had locked it already. Everything had turned to iron, to ice, to hard,
cold, burning impatience. I grasped her shoulders, pulled her towards me. She
resisted, cried, 'Keep away from me!' kicked, struggled, her hand shot out,
dislodging a bowl of delicate wing-shaped shells, which smashed on the floor:
our feet ground them to rainbow powder. I forced her down, crushed her under
the blood-stained tunic, the sharp buckle of the uniform belt caught her arm.
Blood beading the soft white flesh . . . the iron taste of blood in my
mouth....
She lay silent, unmoving, avoiding me by turning her face to the wall. Perhaps
because I could not see her face, she seemed like someone I did not know. I
felt nothing whatever about her, all feeling had left me. I had said I could
not stand any more, and that was the truth. I could not go on; it was all too
humiliating, too painful. I had wanted to finish with her in the past, but had
been unable to do so. Now the moment had come. It was time to get up and go, to
end the whole wretched business. I had let it go on far too long, it had always
been painful and unrewarding. She did not move when I stood up. Neither of us
said a word. We were like two strangers accidentally in the same room. I was
not thinking. All I wanted was to get into the car and drive and drive, until I
was somewhere far away where I could forget all this. I left the room without
looking at her or speaking, and went out into the arctic cold.
Outside it had got quite dark. I paused on the verandah for my eyes to get used
to the blackness. By degrees the snow became visible as it fell, a sort of
faint shimmer like phosphorescence. The hollow roar of the wind came in
irregular bursts, the snowflakes whirled madly in all directions, filled the
night with their spectral chaos. I seemed to feel the same feverish disorder in
myself, in all my pointless rushing from place to place. The crazily dancing
snowflakes represented the whole of life. Her image flew past, the silver hair
streaming and was instantly swept away in the wild confusion. In the delirium
of the dance, it was impossible to distinguish between the violent and the
victims. Anyway, distinctions no longer mattered in a dance of death, where all
the dancers spun on the edge of nothing.
I had grown used to the feeling that I was going towards execution. It was
something in the distance, an idea with which I had become familiar. Now it
suddenly sprang at me, stood close at my elbow, no longer an idea, but a
reality, just about to happen. It gave me a shock, a physical sensation in the
pit of the stomach. The past had vanished and become nothing; the future was
the inconceivable nothingness of annihilation. All that was left was the
ceaselessly shrinking fragment of time called 'now'.
I remembered the dark blue sky of noon and midnight which I had seen above,
while below a wall of rainbow ice moved over the ocean, around the globe. Pale
cliffs looming, radiating dead cold, ghostly avengers coming to end mankind. I
knew the ice was closing in round us, my own eyes had seen the ominous moving
wall. I knew it was coming closer each moment, and would go on advancing until
all life was extinct.
I thought of the girl I had left in the room behind me, a child, immature, a
glass girl. She had not seen, did not understand. She knew she was doomed, but
not the nature of her fate, or how to face it. No one had ever taught her to
stand alone. The hotel proprietor's son had not impressed me as particularly
reliable or protective, but rather a weak unsatisfactory type, and disabled as
well. I did not trust him to look after her when the crisis came. I saw her,
defenceless and terrified, amidst the collapsing mountains of ice; above the
crashes and thunder, heard her feeble pathetic cries. Knowing what I knew, I
could not leave her alone and helpless. She would suffer too much.
I went back indoors. She did not seem to have moved, and though she looked
round when I came into the room, at once twisted away again. She was crying and
did not want me to see her face. I went close to the bed, stood there without
touching her. She looked pathetic, cold, shivering, her skin had the same faint
mauve tinge as some of the shells. It was too easy to hurt her. I said quietly:
'I must ask you something. I don't care how many different men you've slept
with--it's not about that. But I must know why you were so insulting to me just
now. Why have you been trying to humiliate me ever since I arrived?' She would
not look round, I thought she was not going to answer; but then, with long gaps
between the words, she brought out: 'I wanted ... to get . . . my . . . own . .
back. . . .' I protested: 'But what for? I'd only just got here I hadn't done
anything to you.'
'I knew. . . .' I had to bend over her to catch the accusing voice, speaking
through tears. 'Whenever I see you, I always know you'll torment me . . . kick
me around . . . treat me like some sort of slave ... if not at once, in an hour
or two, or next day . . . you're sure to . . . you always do. . .'  I was
startled almost shocked. The words presented a view of myself I much preferred
not to see. I hurriedly asked her another question. 'Who were you waiting for
on the verandah, if it wasn't the hotel fellow?' Once more a totally unexpected
answer disconcerted me. 'For you ... I heard the car ... I thought . . .
wondered. . . .' This time I was astounded, incredulous. 'But that can't
possibly be true--not after what you've just said. Besides, you didn't know I
was coming. I don't believe it.'
She twisted round wildly, sat up, flung back the mass of pale hair, showed her
desolate victim's face, features dissolved in tears, eyes black as if set in
bruises. 'It is true, I tell you whether you believe it or not! I don't know
why . . . you're always so horrible to me... I only know I've always waited.
wondered if you'd come back. You never sent any message . . but I always waited
for you . . stayed here when the others left so that you'd be able to find me.
. . .' She looked a desperate child, sobbing out the truth. But what she said
was so incredible that I said again: 'It's not possible--it can't be true.'
Face convulsed, she gasped in a voice choked by ears: 'Haven't you had enough
yet? Can't you ever stop bullying me?'
Suddenly I felt ashamed, muttered: 'I'm sorry . . .' I wished I could somehow
obliterate past words and actions. She had thrown herself down again, flat on
her face. I stood looking it her, not knowing what to say. The situation seemed
to have gone beyond words. In the end I could think of nothing better than: 'I
didn't come back only to ask those questions, you know.' There was no response
at all. I was not even sure she had heard me. I stood waiting, while the sobs
slowly died away. In the silence, I watched the pulse in her neck, still
beating fast, presently put out my hand, gently touched the spot with the tip
of one finger, then let the hand fall. A skin like white satin, hair the colour
of moonlight....
Slowly she turned her head towards me without a word; her mouth appeared out of
the shining hair, then her wet brilliant eyes, glittering between long lashes.
Now she had stopped crying; but at intervals a shudder, a soundless gasp,
interrupted her breathing, like an interior sob. She did not say anything. I
waited. The seconds passed. When I could not wait any longer, I asked softly:
'Are you coming with me? I promise I won't bully you any more.' She did not
answer, so after a moment, I was obliged to add: 'Or do you want me to go?'
Abruptly she sat up straight, made a distraught movement, but still did not
speak. I waited again: tentatively held out my hands; lived through another
long silence, interminable suspense. At last she gave me her hands. I kissed
them, kissed her hair, lifted her off the bed.
While she was getting ready I stood at the window, staring out at the snow. I
was wondering whether I ought to tell her that I had seen the sinister ice-wall
approaching across the sea, and that in the end it was bound to destroy us and
every thing else. But my thoughts were muddled and inconclusive and I reached
no decision.
She said she was ready, and went to the door; stopped there looking back at the
room. I saw her psychologically-bruised face, her extreme vulnerability, her
unspoken fears. This little room the one friendly familiar place. Everything
outside terrifyingly strange. The huge alien night, the snow, the destroying
cold, the menacing unknown future. Her eyes turned to me, searched my face: a
heavy, doubting, reproachful look, accusing and questioning at the same time. I
was another very disturbing factor; she had absolutely no reason to trust me. I
smiled at her, touched her hand. Her lips moved slightly in what, in different
circumstances, might have become a smile.
We went out together into the onslaught of snow, fled through the swirling
white like escaping ghosts. With no light but the snow's faint phosphorescent
gleam, it was hard to keep to the path. Even with the wind behind us, walking
was hard labour. The distance to the car seemed much greater than I had
thought. I held her arm to guide her and help her along When she stumbled I put
my arm round her, steadied her held her up. Under the thick loden coat she was
cold as ice her hands felt frozen through my heavy gloves. I tried to rub some
warmth into them, for a moment she leaned on me, her face a moonstone, luminous
in the dark, her lashes tipped white with snow. She was tired, I sensed the
effort she made to start walking again. I encouraged her, praised her, kept my
arm round her waist, picked her up and carried her the last part of the way.
When we were in the car, I switched on the heater before doing anything else.
The interior was warm in less than minute, but she did not relax, sat beside me
silent and tense. Catching a sidelong suspicious glance, I felt myself justly
accused. After the way I had treated her, suspicion was all I deserved. She
could not know that I had just discovered a new pleasure in tenderness. I asked
if she was hungry; she shook her head. I produced some chocolate from the food
parcel, offered it to her. No chocolate had been available for civilians for a
very long time. I remembered she used to like his particular brand. She looked
at it doubtfully, seemed about to refuse, then relaxed suddenly, took it,
thanked me with a timid and touching smile. I wondered why I had waited to long
to be kind to her, until it was almost too late. I said nothing about our
ultimate fate, or about the ice-wall coming nearer and nearer. Instead, I told
her the ice would stop moving before it reached the equator; that we would find
a place here where we would be safe. I did not think this was remotely
possible, did not know whether she believed it. However the end came, we should
be together; I could at least make it quick and easy for her.
Driving the big car through the glacial night I was almost happy. I did not
regret that other world I had longed for and lost. My world was now ending in
snow and ice, there was nothing else left. Human life was over, the astronauts
underground, buried by tons of ice, the scientists wiped out by their own
disaster. I felt exhilarated because we two were alive, racing through the
blizzard together.
It was getting more and more difficult to see out. As fast as the frost-flowers
were cleared from the windscreen they reformed in more opaque patterns, until I
could see nothing through them but falling snow; an infinity of snowflakes like
ghostly birds, incessantly swooping past from nowhere to nowhere.
The world seemed to have come to an end already. It did not matter. The car had
become our world; a small, bright heated room; our home in the vast,
indifferent, freezing universe. To preserve the warmth generated by our bodies
we kept close to each other. She no longer seemed tense or suspicious, leaning
against my shoulder.
A terrible cold world of ice and death had replaced the living world we had
always known. Outside there was only the deadly cold, the frozen vacuum of an
ice age, life reduced to mineral crystals; but here, in our lighted room, we
were safe and warm. I looked into her face, it was smiling, untroubled I could
see no fear, no sadness there now. She smiled and pressed close, content with
me in our home.
I drove at great speed, as if escaping, pretending we could escape. Although I
knew there was no escape from the ice, from the ever-diminishing remnant of
time that encapsuled us. I made the most of the minutes. The miles and the
minute flew past. The weight of the gun in my pocket was reassuring.
